The Reign of King Edward the Third





Sc. 1 Enter King Edward, the Earl of Derby, the Earl of Warwick,⌉ Edward Prince of Wales, Lord Audley and the Comte d’Artois



KING EDWARD

Robert of Artois, banished though thou be

From France thy native country, yet with us

Thou shalt retain as great a seigniory:

For we create thee Earl of Richmond here.

And now go forwards with our pedigree:

Who next succeeded King Philippe of Beau?

COMTE D’ARTOIS

Three sons of his, which all successively

Did sit upon their father’s regal throne,

Yet died and left no issue of their loins.

KING EDWARD

But was my mother sister unto those?

COMTE D’ARTOIS

She was, my lord, and only Isabel

Was all the daughters that this Philippe had,

Whom afterward your father took to wife.

And from the fragrant garden of her womb

Your gracious self, the flower of Europe’s hope,

Derived is inheritor to France.

But note the rancour of rebellious minds:

When thus the lineage of Beau was out

The French obscured your mother’s privilege

And, though she were the next of blood, proclaimed

Jean of the house of Valois now their king.

The reason was, they say, the realm of France

Replete with princes of great parentage

Ought not admit a governor to rule

Except he be descended of the male.

And that’s the special ground of their contempt

Wherewith they study to exclude your grace.

KING EDWARD

But they shall find that forged ground of theirs

To be but dusty heaps of brittle sand.

COMTE D’ARTOIS

Perhaps it will be thought a heinous thing

That I, a Frenchman, should discover this.

But heaven I call to record of my vows:

It is not hate nor any private wrong,

But love unto my country and the right

Provokes my tongue thus lavish in report.

You are the lineal watchman of our peace,

And Jean of Valois indirectly climbs.

What then should subjects but embrace their king?

Ah, wherein may our duty more be seen

Than striving to rebate a tyrant’s pride

And place thee, the true shepherd of our commonwealth?

KING EDWARD

This counsel, Artois, like to fruitful showers,

Hath added growth unto my dignity,

And by the fiery vigour of thy words

Hot courage is engendered in my breast,

Which heretofore was raked in ignorance

But now doth mount with golden wings of fame

And will approve fair Isabel’s descent,

Able to yoke their stubborn necks with steel

That spurn against my sovereignty in France.

Sound a horn



A messenger. Lord Audley, know from whence.

⌈Enter a messenger, the Duc de Lorraine⌉





AUDLEY

The Duke of Lorraine, having crossed the seas,

Entreats he may have conference with your highness.

KING EDWARD

Admit him, lords, that we may hear the news.

(To Lorraine) Say, Duke of Lorraine, wherefore art thou come? 55

DUC DE LORRAINE

The most renowned prince, King Jean of France,

Doth greet thee, Edward, and by me commands

That, forsomuch as by his liberal gift

The Guienne dukedom is entailed to thee,

Thou do him lowly homage for the same.

And for that purpose, here I summon thee

Repair to France within these forty days

That there, according as the custom is,

Thou mayst be sworn true liegeman to our king;

Or else thy title in that province dies

And he himself will repossess the place.

KING EDWARD

See how occasion laughs me in the face!

No sooner minded to prepare for France

But straight I am invited—nay, with threats,

Upon a penalty, enjoined to come!

‘Twere but a childish part to say him nay.

Lorraine, return this answer to thy lord:

I mean to visit him as he requests.

But how? Not servilely disposed to bend,

But like a conqueror to make him bow.

His lame unpolished shifts are come to light,

And truth hath pulled the vizard from his face

That set a gloss upon his arrogance.

Dare he command a fealty in me?

Tell him the crown that he usurps is mine,

And where he sets his foot he ought to kneel.

’Tis not a petty dukedom that I claim

But all the whole dominions of the realm

Which if, with grudging, he refuse to yield

I’ll take away those borrowed plumes of his,

And send him naked to the wilderness.

DUC DE LORRAINE

Then, Edward, here, in spite of all thy lords,

I do pronounce defiance to thy face.

PRINCE OF WALES

Defiance, Frenchman? We rebound it back

Even to the bottom of thy master’s throat!

And, be it spoke with reverence of the King,

My gracious father, and these other lords,

I hold thy message but as scurrilous,

And him that sent thee like the lazy drone

Crept up by stealth unto the eagle’s nest,

From whence we’ll shake him with so rough a storm

As others shall be warned by his harm.

EARL OF WARWICK (to Lorraine)

Bid him leave off the lion’s case he wears

Lest, meeting with the lion in the field,

He chance to tear him piecemeal for his pride.

COMTE D’ARTOIS (to Lorraine)

The soundest counsel I can give his grace

Is to surrender ere he be constrained.

A voluntary mischief hath less scorn

Than when reproach with violence is borne.

DUC DE LORRAINE

Regenerate traitor, viper to the place

Where thou wast fostered in thine infancy!

Bear’st thou a part in this conspiracy?

⌈Lorraine⌉ draws his sword





KING EDWARD ⌈drawing his sword⌉

Lorraine, behold the sharpness of this steel:

Fervent desire that sits against my heart

Is far more thorny-pricking than this blade

That, with the nightingale, I shall be scarred

As oft as I dispose myself to rest

Until my colours be displayed in France.

This is thy final answer. So be gone.

DUC DE LORRAINE

It is not that, nor any English brave,

Afflicts me so, as doth his poisoned view:

That is most false, should most of all be true. Exit

KING EDWARD

Now, lords, our fleeting barque is under sail,

Our gage is thrown, and war is soon begun,

But not so quickly brought unto an end.

Enter Sir William Montague





But wherefore comes Sir William Montague?

(To Montague) How stands the league between the Scot and us?

MONTAGUE

Cracked and dissevered, my renowned lord.

The treacherous King no sooner was informed

Of your withdrawing of your army back

But straight, forgetting of his former oath,

He made invasion on the bordering towns.

Berwick is won, Newcastle spoiled and lost,

And now the tyrant hath begirt with siege

The Castle of Roxburgh, where, enclosed,

The Countess Salisbury is like to perish.

KING EDWARD (to Warwick)

That is thy daughter, Warwick, is it not?

Whose husband hath in Bretagne served so long

About the planting of Lord Montfort there?

EARL OF WARWICK It is, my lord.

KING EDWARD

Ignoble David, hast thou none to grieve

But seely ladies with thy threat’ning arms?

But I will make you shrink your snaily horns.

(To Audley) First, therefore, Audley, this shall be thy charge:

Go levy footmen for our wars in France.

(To the Prince of Wales) And, Ned, take muster of our men-at-arms.

In every shire elect a several band.

Let them be soldiers of a lusty spirit,

Such as dread nothing but dishonour’s blot.

Be wary therefore, since we do commence

A famous war, and with so mighty a nation.

(To Derby) Derby, be thou ambassador for us

Unto our father-in-law, the Earl of Hainault.

Make him acquainted with our enterprise,

And likewise will him, with our own allies

That are in Flanders, to solicit, too,

The Emperor of Almagne in our name.

Myself, whilst you are jointly thus employed,

Will, with these forces that I have at hand,

March and once more repulse the traitorous Scot.

But sirs, be resolute. We shall have wars

On every side. (To the Prince of Wales) And, Ned, thou must begin

Now to forget thy study and thy books,

And ure thy shoulders to an armour’s weight.

PRINCE OF WALES

As cheerful sounding to my youthful spleen

This tumult is of war’s increasing broils,

As at the coronation of a king

The joyful clamours of the people are

When ‘Ave Caesar’ they pronounce aloud.

Within this school of honour I shall learn

Either to sacrifice my foes to death,

Or, in a rightful quarrel, spend my breath.

Then cheerfully forward, each a several way.

In great affairs ’tis naught to use delay. Exeunt





Sc. 2 Enter the Countess of Salisbury, above



COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Alas, how much in vain my poor eyes gaze

For succour that my sovereign should send.

Ah, cousin Montague, I fear thou wants

The lively spirit sharply to solicit

With vehement suit the King in my behalf.

Thou dost not tell him what a grief it is

To be the scornful captive to a Scot,

Either to be wooed with broad untuned oaths,

Or forced by rough insulting barbarism.

Thou dost not tell him, if he here prevail,

How much they will deride us in the North,

And in their vile, uncivil, skipping jigs

Bray forth their conquest and our overthrow

Even in the barren, bleak and fruitless air—

Enter below David King of Scotland and Sir William Douglas with ⌈soldiers, meeting⌉ the Due de Lorraine





(Aside) I must withdraw. The everlasting foe

Comes to the wall. I’ll closely step aside

And list their babble, blunt and full of pride.

The Countess withdraws

KING OF SCOTLAND

My lord of Lorraine, to our brother of France

Commend us as the man in Christendom

That we most reverence and entirely love.

Touching your embassage, return and say

That we with England will not enter parley,

Nor never make fair weather, or take truce,

But burn their neighbour towns, and so persist

With eager roads beyond their city York;

And never shall our bonny riders rest,

Nor rusting canker have the time to eat

Their light-borne snaffle, nor their nimble spur,

Nor lay aside their jacks of gimmaled mail,

Nor hang their staves of grained Scottish ash

In peaceful wise upon their city walls,

Nor from their buttoned tawny leathern belts

Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your King

Cry out, ‘Enough! Spare England now for pity!’

Farewell, and tell him that you leave us here,

Before this castle; say you came from us

Even when we had that yielded to our hands.

DUC DE LORRAINE

Take I my leave, and fairly will return

Your acceptable greeting to my King. Exit

KING OF SCOTLAND (to Douglas)

Now, Douglas, to our former task again

For the division of this certain spoil.

DOUGLAS

My liege, I crave the lady, and no more.

KING OF SCOTLAND

Nay, soft ye, sir; first I must make my choice,

And first I do bespeak her for myself.

DOUGLAS

Why then, my liege, let me enjoy her jewels.

KING OF SCOTLAND

Those are her own, still liable to her;

And who inherits her hath those with all.

Enter a Scottish messenger in haste





MESSENGER

My liege, as we were pricking on the hills

To fetch in booty, marching hitherward

We might descry a mighty host of men.

The sun, reflecting on the armour, showed

A field of plate; a wood of picks advanced.

Bethink your highness speedily herein:

An easy march within four hours will bring

The hindmost rank unto this place, my liege.

KING OF SCOTLAND

Dislodge! Dislodge! It is the King of England!

DOUGLAS ⌈to the Messenger⌉

Jemmy, my man, saddle my bonny black.

KING OF SCOTLAND

Mean’st thou to fight, Douglas? We are too weak.

DOUGLAS

I know it well, my liege, and therefore fly.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY (coming forward above)

My lords of Scotland, will ye stay and drink?

KING OF SCOTLAND

She mocks us, Douglas. I cannot endure it.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Say, good my lord, which is he must have the lady,

And which her jewels? I am sure, my lords,

Ye will not hence till you have shared the spoils.

KING OF SCOTLAND

She heard the messenger and heard our talk,

And now that comfort makes her scorn at us.

Enter another ⌈Scottish⌉ messenger





SECOND MESSENGER

Arm, my good lord! O we are all surprised!

After the French ambassador, my liege,

And tell him that you dare not ride to York.

⌈COUNTESS OF SALISBURY (to the King of Scotland)⌉

Excuse it that your bonny horse is lame.

KING OF SCOTLAND ⌈aside⌉

She heard that too! Intolerable grief!

(To the Countess) Woman, farewell, although I do not stay—

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

‘Tis not for fear, and yet you run away. ⌈Exeunt Scots⌉

O happy comfort, welcome to our house!

The confident and boist’rous boasting Scot,

That swore before my walls they would not back

For all the armed power of this land,

With faceless fear that ever turns his back,

Turned hence against the blasting north-east wind

Upon the bare report and name of arms!

Enter Sir William de Montague with soldiers





O summer’s day! See where my cousin comes!

MONTAGUE

How fares my aunt? We are not Scots—

Why do you shut your gates against your friends?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Well may I give a welcome, coz, to thee,

For thou com’st well to chase my foes from hence.

MONTAGUE

The King himself is come in person hither.

Dear aunt, descend, and gratulate his highness.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

How may I entertain his majesty

To show my duty and his dignity?

Exit from above

Enter King Edward, the Earl of Warwick and the Comte d’Artois, with others, ⌈including Lodowick⌉





KING EDWARD

What, are the stealing foxes fled and gone

Before we could uncouple at their heels?

EARL OF WARWICK

They are, my liege, but with a cheerful cry

Hot hounds and hardy chase them at the heels.

Enter the Countess of Salisbury below





KING EDWARD

This is the Countess, Warwick, is it not?

EARL OF WARWICK

Even she, my liege, whose beauty tyrants’ fear—

As a May blossom with pernicious winds—

Hath sullied, withered, overcast and done.

KING EDWARD

Hath she been fairer, Warwick, than she is?

EARL OF WARWICK

My gracious King, fair is she not at all

If that her self were by to stain herself

As I have seen her when she was her self.

KING EDWARD ⌈aside⌉

What strange enchantment lurked in those her eyes,

When they excelled this excellence they have,

That now her dim decline hath power to draw

My subject eyes from piercing majesty

To gaze on her with doting admiration?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY (kneeling before King Edward)

In duty, lower than the ground I kneel,

And fore my dull knees bow my feeling heart,

To witness my obedience to your highness

With many millions of a subject’s thanks

For this your royal presence, whose approach

Hath driven war and danger from my gate.

KING EDWARD

Lady, stand up. I come to bring thee peace,

However thereby I have purchased war.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY (rising)

No war to you, my liege. The Scots are gone

And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate.

KING EDWARD (aside)

Lest yielding here I pine in shameful love—

(Aloud) Come, we’ll pursue the Scots. Artois, away!

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

A little while, my gracious sovereign, stay,

And let the power of a mighty king

Honour our roof. My husband, in the wars,

When he shall hear it, will triumph for joy.

Then, dear my liege, now niggard not thy state;

Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.

KING EDWARD

Pardon me, Countess, I will come no near:

I dreamed tonight of treason, and I fear.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Far from this place let ugly treason lie.

KING EDWARD (aside)

No farther off than her conspiring eye,

Which shoots infected poison in my heart

Beyond repulse of wit or cure of art.

Now in the sun alone it doth not lie

With light to take light from a mortal eye;

For here two day-stars that mine eyes would see

More than the sun steals mine own light from me.

Contemplative desire, desire to be

In contemplation that may master thee.

(Aloud) Warwick, Artois, to horse and let’s away!

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

What might I speak to make my sovereign stay?

KING EDWARD (aside)

What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye

That more persuades than winning oratory?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Let not thy presence, like the April sun,

Flatter our earth and suddenly be done.

More happy do not make our outward wall

Than thou wilt grace our inner house withal.

Our house, my liege, is like a country swain,

Whose habit rude, and manners blunt and plain,

Presageth naught, yet inly beautified

With bounty’s riches and fair hidden pride.

For where the golden ore doth buried lie,

The ground, undecked with nature’s tapestry,

Seems barren, sere, unfertile, fruitless, dry;

And where the upper turf of earth doth boast

His pride, perfumes and parti-coloured cost,

Delve there and find this issue and their pride

To spring from ordure and corruptious stied.

But, to make up my all-too-long compare,

These ragged walls no testimony are

What is within, but like a cloak doth hide

From weather’s waste the under garnished pride.

More gracious than my terms can, let thee be:

Entreat thyself to stay a while with me.

KING EDWARD

As wise as fair—what fond fit can be heard

When wisdom keeps the gate as beauty’s guard?

Countess, albeit my business urgeth me

It shall attend while I attend on thee.

Come on, my lords, here will I host tonight.

Exeunt ⌈all but Lodowick⌉

LODOWICK

I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,

His ear to drink her sweet tongue’s utterance,

And changing passion, like inconstant clouds

That rack upon the carriage of the winds,

Increase and die in his disturbed cheeks.

Lo, when she blushed, even then did he look pale,

As if her cheeks by some enchanted power

Attracted had the cherry blood from his.

Anon, with reverent fear when she grew pale,

His cheeks put on their scarlet ornaments,

But no more like her oriental red

Than brick to coral or live things to dead.

Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks?

If she did blush, ‘twas tender modest shame

Being in the sacred presence of a king.

If he did blush, ’twas rude immodest shame

To vail his eyes amiss, being a king.

If she looked pale, ‘twas seely woman’s fear

To bear herself in presence of a king.

If he looked pale, it was with guilty fear

To dote amiss, being a mighty king.

Then, Scottish wars, farewell. I fear ’twill prove

A ling’ring English siege of peevish love.

Enter King Edward





Here comes his highness, walking all alone.

⌈Lodowick withdraws⌉

KING EDWARD (aside)

She is grown more fairer far since I came hither,

Her voice more silver every word than other,

Her wit more fluent. What a strange discourse

Unfolded she of David and his Scots:

‘Even thus’, quoth she, ‘he spake,’ and then spoke broad,

With epithets and accents of the Scot,

But somewhat better than the Scot could speak.

‘And thus,’ quoth she, and answered then herself,

For who could speak like her? But she herself

Breathes from the wall an angel’s note from heaven

Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes.

When she would talk of peace, methinks her tongue

Commanded war to prison; when of war,

It wakened Caesar from his Roman grave

To hear war beautified by her discourse;

Wisdom is foolishness but in her tongue,

Beauty a slander but in her fair face,

There is no summer but in her cheerful looks,

Nor frosty winter but in her disdain.

I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her,

For she is all the treasure of our land,

But call them cowards that they ran away,

Having so rich and fair a cause to stay.

(Aloud) Art thou there, Lod’wick?

⌈Lodowick comes forward⌉





Give me ink and paper.





LODOWICK I will, my liege.

KING EDWARD

And bid the lords hold on their play at chess,

For we will walk and meditate alone.

LODOWICK I will, my sovereign. Exit

KING EDWARD

This fellow is well read in poetry,

And hath a lusty and persuasive spirit.

I will acquaint him with my passion,

Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawn,

Through which the queen of beauty’s queen shall see

Herself the ground of my infirmity.

Enter Lodowick, with pen, ink and paper





Hast thou pen, ink and paper ready, Lod’wick?

LODOWICK Ready, my liege.

KING EDWARD

Then in the summer arbour sit by me;

Make it our council house or cabinet:

Since green our thoughts, green be the conventicle

Where we will ease us by disburd’ning them.

⌈They sit. Lodowick prepares to write⌉





Now, Lod‘wick, invocate some golden muse

To bring thee hither an enchanted pen

That may for sighs set down true sighs indeed,

Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan,

And when thou write’st of tears, encouch the word

Before and after with such sweet laments

That it may raise drops in a Tartar’s eye,

And make a flint-heart Scythian pitiful—

For so much moving hath a poet’s pen.

Then, if thou be a poet, move thou so

And be enriched by thy sovereign’s love.

For if the touch of sweet concordant strings

Could force attendance in the ears of hell,

How much more shall the strains of poets’ wit

Beguile and ravish soft and human minds?

LODOWICK

To whom, my lord, shall I direct my style?

KING EDWARD

To one that stains the fair and sots the wise,

Whose body is an abstract or a brief,

Contains each general virtue in the world.

‘Better than beautiful’, thou must begin,

Devise for fair a fairer word than ‘fair’,

And every ornament that thou wouldst praise,

Fly it a pitch above the soar of praise.

For flattery fear thou not to be convicted,

For were thy admiration ten times more,

Ten times ten thousand more the worth exceeds

Of that thou art to praise thy praise’s worth.

Begin; I will to contemplate the while.

Forget not to set down how passionate,

How heart-sick and how full of languishment

Her beauty makes me.

LODOWICK Write I to a woman?

KING EDWARD

What beauty else could triumph over me,

Or who but women do our love-lays greet?

What think’st thou I did bid thee praise? A horse?

LODOWICK

Of what condition or estate she is

’Twere requisite that I should know, my lord.

KING EDWARD

Of such estate that hers is as a throne,

And my estate the footstool where she treads.

Then mayst thou judge what her condition is

By the proportion of her mightiness.

Write on, while I peruse her in my thoughts.

⌈ ⌉

Her voice to music or the nightingale.

To music every summer-leaping swain

Compares his sunburnt lover when she speaks,

And why should I speak of the nightingale?

The nightingale sings of adulterate wrong

And that compare is too satirical,

For sin, though sin, would not be so esteemed,

But rather virtue sin, sin virtue deemed.

Her hair far softer than the silkworm’s twist,

Like to a flattering glass doth make more fair

The yellow amber—‘like a flattering glass’

Comes in too soon: for writing of her eyes

I’ll say that like a glass they catch the sun,

And thence the hot reflection doth rebound

Against my breast and burns my heart within.

Ah, what a world of descant makes my soul

Upon this voluntary ground of love!

Come, Lod’wick: hast thou turned thy ink to gold?

If not, write but in letters capital

My mistress’ name, and it will gild thy paper.

Read, Lod’wick, read!

Fill thou the empty hollows of mine ears

With the sweet hearing of thy poetry!

LODOWICK

I have not to a period brought her praise.

KING EDWARD

Her praise is as my Love—both infinite,

Which apprehend such violent extremes

That they disdain an ending period.

Her beauty hath no match but my affection;

Hers more than most, mine most, and more than more;

Hers more to praise than tell the sea by drops—

Nay more!—than drop the massy earth by sands,

And sand by sand print them in memory.

Then wherefore talk’st thou of a period

To that which craves unended admiration?

Read. Let us hear.

LODOWICK (reading)

‘More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades’—

KING EDWARD (staying him)

That line hath two faults, gross and palpable.

Compar’st thou her to the pale queen of night,

Who, being set in dark, seems therefore light?

What is she when the sun lifts up his head

But like a fading taper, dim and dead?

My love shall brave the eye of heaven at noon,

And, being unmasked, outshine the golden sun!

LODOWICK

What is the other fault, my sovereign lord?

KING EDWARD

Read o’er the line again.

LODOWICK (reading) ‘More fair and chaste’—

KING EDWARD (staying him)

I did not bid thee talk of chastity,

To ransack so the treasure of her mind,

For I had rather have her chased than chaste!

Out with the moon line! I will none of it.

And let me have her likened to the sun-

Say she hath thrice more splendour than the sun,

That her perfections emulates the sun,

That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,

That she doth thaw cold winter like the sun,

That she doth cheer fresh summer like the sun,

That she doth dazzle gazers like the sun,

And in this application to the sun

Bid her be free and general as the sun,

Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows

As lovingly as on the fragrant rose.

Let’s see what follows that same moonlight line.

LODOWICK (reading)

‘More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades,

More bold in constancy’—

KING EDWARD (staying him)

In constancy than who?

LODOWICK (reading)

‘...than Judith was.’

KING EDWARD

O monstrous line! Put in the next a sword

And I shall woo her to cut off my head!

Blot, blot, good Lod’wick. Let us hear the next.

LODOWICK There’s all that yet is done.

KING EDWARD

I thank thee then. Thou hast done little ill,

But what is done is passing passing ill.

No, let the captain talk of boist’rous war,

The prisoner of emurèd dark constraint;

The sick man best sets down the pangs of death,

The man that starves the sweetness of a feast,

The frozen soul the benefit of fire,

And every grief his happy opposite.

Love cannot sound well but in lovers’ tongues.

Give me the pen and paper. I will write.

Lodowick gives him the pen and paper.

Enter the Countess of Salisbury





(Aside) But soft—here comes the treasurer of my spirit.

(Aloud to Lodowick, showing him the paper in his hand)

Lod‘wick, thou know’st not how to draw a battle!

These wings, these flankers and these squadrons

Argue in thee defective discipline.

Thou shouldst have placed this here, this other here—

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Pardon my boldness, my thrice-gracious lords.

Let my intrusion here be called my duty

That comes to see my sovereign how he fares.

KING EDWARD (to Lodowick, giving him the paper)

Go, draw the same, I tell thee in what form.

LODOWICK I go. Exit

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Sorry I am to see my liege so sad.

What may thy subject do to drive from thee

Thy gloomy consort, sullen melancholy?

KING EDWARD

Ah, lady, I am blunt and cannot strew

The flowers of solace in a ground of shame.

Since I came hither, Countess, I am wronged.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Now God forbid that any in my house

Should think my sovereign wrong! Thrice-gentle King,

Acquaint me with thy cause of discontent.

KING EDWARD

How near, then, shall I be to remedy?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

As near, my liege, as all my woman’s power

Can pawn itself to buy thy remedy.

KING EDWARD

If thou speak’st true, then have I my redress.

Engage thy power to redeem my joys,

And I am joyful, Countess; else I die.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY I will, my liege.

KING EDWARD Swear, Countess, that thou wilt.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY By heaven, I will.

KING EDWARD

Then take thyself a little way aside

And tell thyself a king doth dote on thee.

Say that within thy power it doth lie

To make him happy, and that thou hast sworn

To give him all the joy within thy power-

Do this, and tell me when I shall be happy.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

All this is done, my thrice-dread sovereign.

That power of love that I have power to give

Thou hast, with all devout obedience.

Employ me how thou wilt in proof thereof.

KING EDWARD

Thou hear’st me say that I do dote on thee.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

If on my beauty, take it if thou canst;

Though little, I do prize it ten times less.

If on my virtue, take it if thou canst;

For virtue’s store, by giving, doth augment.

Be it on what it will that I can give,

And thou canst take away, inherit it.

KING EDWARD

It is thy beauty that I would enjoy.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

O, were it painted I would wipe it off

And dispossess myself to give it thee!

But, sovereign, it is soldered to my life:

Take one, and both, for, like an humble shadow,

It haunts the sunshine of my summer’s life—

KING EDWARD

But thou mayst lend it me to sport withal.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

As easy may my intellectual soul

Be lent away and yet my body live

As lend my body, palace to my soul,

Away from her and yet retain my soul.

My body is her bower, her court, her abbey;

And she an angel, pure, divine, unspotted.

If I should lend her house, my lord, to thee,

I kill my poor soul, and my poor soul me.

KING EDWARD

Didst thou not swear to give me what I would?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

I did, my liege, so what you would I could.

KING EDWARD

I wish no more of thee than thou mayst give,

Nor beg I do not, but I rather buy—

That is, thy love; and for that love of thine

In rich exchange I tender to thee mine.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

But that your lips were sacred, good my lord,

You would profane the holy name of love.

That love you offer me you cannot give,

For Caesar owes that tribute to his queen.

That love you beg of me I cannot give,

For Sarah owes that duty to her lord.

He that doth clip or counterfeit your stamp

Shall die, my lord: and will your sacred self

Commit high treason ‘gainst the king of heaven

To stamp his image in forbidden metal,

Forgetting your allegiance and your oath?

In violating marriage’ sacred law

You break a greater honour than yourself:

To be a king is of a younger house

Than to be married. Your progenitor,

Sole reigning Adam o’er the universe,

By God was honoured for a married man,

But not by him anointed for a king.

It is a penalty to break your statutes,

Though not enacted with your highness’ hand;

How much more to infringe the holy act

Made by the mouth of God, sealed with his hand!

I know my sovereign—in my husband’s love,

Who now doth loyal service in his wars—

Doth but so try the wife of Salisbury,

Whether she will hear a wanton’s tale or no.

Lest being therein guilty by my stay,

From that, not from my liege, I turn away. Exit

KING EDWARD

Whether is her beauty by her words divine,

Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty?

Like as the wind doth beautify a sail

And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,

So do her words her beauties, beauty words.

O, that I were a honey-gathering bee

To bear the comb of virtue from this flower,

And not a poison-sucking, envious spider

To turn the juice I take to deadly venoml

Religion is austere, and beauty gentle—

Too strict a guardian for so fair a ward.

O, that she were as is the air to me!

Why, so she is: for when I would embrace her,

This do I (embracing the air), and catch nothing but myself.

I must enjoy her, for I cannot beat

With reason and reproof fond love away.

Enter the Earl of Warwick





(Aside) Here comes her father. I will work with him

To bear my colours in this field of love.

EARL OF WARWICK

How is it that my sovereign is so sad?

May I, with pardon, know your highness’ grief?

An that my old endeavour will remove it,

It shall not cumber long your majesty.

KING EDWARD

A kind and voluntary gift thou proffer’st

That I was forward to have begged of thee.

But, O, thou world, great nurse of flattery,

Why dost thou tip men’s tongues with golden words,

And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead

That fair performance cannot follow promise?

O, that a man might hold the heart’s close book

And choke the lavish tongue when it doth utter

The breath of falsehood not charactered there!

EARL OF WARWICK

Far be it from the honour of my age

That I should owe bright gold and render lead.

Age is a cynic, not a flatterer.

I say again that if I knew your grief,

And that by me it may be lessened,

My proper harm should buy your highness’ good.

KING EDWARD

These are the vulgar tenders of false men

That never pay the duty of their words.

Thou wilt not stick to swear what thou hast said,

But when thou know’st my griefs condition

This rash disgorged vomit of thy word

Thou wilt eat up again, and leave me helpless.

EARL OF WARWICK

By heaven, I will not, though your majesty

Did bid me run upon your sword and die!

KING EDWARD

Say that my grief is no way medicinable

But by the loss and bruising of thine honour?

EARL OF WARWICK

If nothing but that loss may vantage you

I would account that loss my vantage too.

KING EDWARD

Think’st that thou canst unswear thy oath again?

EARL OF WARWICK

I cannot, nor I would not if I could.

KING EDWARD

But if thou dost, what shall I say to thee?

EARL OF WARWICK

What may be said to any perjured villain

That breaks the sacred warrant of an oath.

KING EDWARD

What wilt thou say to one that breaks an oath?

EARL OF WARWICK

That he hath broke his faith with God and man,

And from them both stands excommunicate.

KING EDWARD

What office were it to suggest a man

To break a lawful and religious vow?

EARL OF WARWICK

An office for the devil, not for man.

KING EDWARD

That devil’s office must thou do for me,

Or break thy oath and cancel all the bonds

Of love and duty ‘twixt thyself and me.

And therefore, Warwick, if thou art thyself,

The lord and master of thy word and oath,

Go to thy daughter and, in my behalf,

Command her, woo her, win her any ways

To be my mistress and my secret love.

I will not stand to hear thee make reply;

Thy oath break hers, or let thy sovereign die. Exit

EARL OF WARWICK

O doting king! O detestable office!

Well may I tempt myself to wrong myself,

When he hath sworn me by the name of God

To break a vow made by the name of God.

What if I swear by this right hand of mine

To cut this right hand off? The better way

Were to profane the idol than confound it,

But neither will I do. I’ll keep mine oath

And to my daughter make a recantation

Of all the virtue I have preached to her.

I’ll say she must forget her husband, Salisbury—

If she remember to embrace the King.

I’ll say an oath may easily be broken—

But not so easily pardoned, being broken.

I’ll say it is true charity to love—

But not true love to be so charitable.

I’ll say his greatness may bear out the shame—

But not his kingdom can buy out the sin.

I’ll say it is my duty to persuade—

But not her honesty to give consent.

Enter the Countess of Salisbury





(Aside) See where she comes. Was never father had

Against his child an embassage so bad.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

My lord and father, I have sought for you.

My mother and the peers importune you

To keep in presence of his majesty,

And do your best to make his highness merry.

EARL OF WARWICK (aside)

How shall I enter in this graceless errand?

I must not call her child, for where’s the father

That will in such a suit seduce his child?

Then ‘wife of Salisbury’—shall I so begin?

No, he’s my friend, and where is found the friend

That will do friendship such endamagement?

(To the Countess) Neither my daughter, nor my dear friend’s wife,

I am not Warwick, as thou think‘st I am,

But an attorney from the court of hell,

That thus have housed my spirit in his form

To do a message to thee from the King:

‘The mighty King of England dotes on thee:

He that hath power to take away thy life

Hath power to take thy honour. Then consent

To pawn thine honour rather than thy life;

Honour is often lost and got again,

But life, once gone, hath no recovery.

The sun that withers hay doth nourish grass,

The King that would distain thee, will advance thee.

The poets write that great Achilles’ spear

Could heal the wound it made; the moral is,

What mighty men misdo they can amend.

The lion doth become his bloody jaws

And grace his foragement by being mild

When vassal fear lies trembling at his feet.

The King will, in his glory, hide thy shame,

And those that gaze on him, to find out thee,

Will lose their eyesight looking in the sun.

What can one drop of poison harm the sea

Whose hugy vastures can digest the ill

And make it lose his operation?

The King’s great name will temper thy misdeeds,

And give the bitter potion of reproach

A sugared, sweet and most delicious taste.

Besides, it is no harm to do the thing

Which, without shame, could not be left undone.’

Thus have I, in his majesty’s behalf,

Apparelled sin in virtuous sentences,

And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Unnatural besiege! Woe me unhappy,

To have escaped the danger of my foes

And to be ten times worse envir‘ned by friends!

Hath he no means to stain my honest blood

But to corrupt the author of my blood

To be his scandalous and vile solicitor?

No marvel though the branch be then infected,

When poison hath encompassed the root;

No marvel though the leprous infant die,

When the stern dame envenometh the dug.

Why then, give sin a passport to offend,

And youth the dangerous rein of liberty.

Blot out the strict forbidding of the law,

And cancel every canon that prescribes

A shame for shame, or penance for offence.

No, let me die if his too boist’rous will

Will have it so, before I will consent

To be an actor in his graceless lust.

EARL OF WARWICK

Why, now thou speak‘st as I would have thee speak!

And mark how I unsay my words again:

An honourable grave is more esteemed

Than the polluted closet of a king.

The greater man, the greater is the thing,

Be it good or bad, that he shall undertake.

An unreputed mote flying in the sun

Presents a greater substance than it is.

The freshest summer’s day doth soonest taint

The loathed carrion that it seems to kiss.

Deep are the blows made with a mighty axe.

That sin doth ten times aggravate itself

That is committed in a holy place.

An evil deed done by authority

Is sin and subornation. Deck an ape

In tissue, and the beauty of the robe

Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast.

A spacious field of reasons could I urge

Between his glory, daughter, and thy shame:

That poison shows worst in a golden cup;

Dark night seems darker by the lightning flash;

Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds;

And every glory that inclines to sin,

The shame is treble by the opposite.

So leave I with my blessing in thy bosom,

Which then convert to a most heavy curse

When thou convert’st from honour’s golden name

To the black faction of bed-blotting shame.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

I’ll follow thee, and when my mind turns so,

My body sink my soul in endless woe. Exeunt





Sc. 3 Enter at one door the Earl of Derby from France. At another door, enter Lord Audley with a drummer



EARL OF DERBY

Thrice-noble Audley, well encountered here.

How is it with our sovereign and his peers?

AUDLEY



‘Tis full a fortnight since I saw his highness,

What time he sent me forth to muster men,

Which I accordingly have done, and bring them hither,

In fair array, before his majesty.

What news, my lord of Derby, from the Emperor?

EARL OF DERBY

As good as we desire. The Emperor

Hath yielded to his highness friendly aid,

And makes our king lieutenant-general

In all his lands and large dominions.

Then via for the spacious bounds of France!

AUDLEY

What, doth his highness leap to hear these news?

EARL OF DERBY

I have not yet found time to open them.

The King is in his closet, malcontent.

For what I know not, but he gave in charge

Till after dinner none should interrupt him.

The Countess Salisbury and her father Warwick,

Artois, and all, look underneath the brows.

AUDLEY

Undoubtedly, then, something is amiss.

Sound trumpets within





EARL OF DERBY

The trumpets sound. The King is now abroad.

Enter King Edward





COMTE D’ARTOIS Here comes his highness.

EARL OF DERBY (to the King)

Befall my sovereign all my sovereign’s wish.

KING EDWARD ⌈aside⌉

Ah, that thou wert a witch to make it so.

EARL OF DERBY

The Emperor greeteth you—

KING EDWARD ⌈aside⌉ Would it were the Countess.

EARL OF DERBY

—And hath accorded to your highness’ suit.

KING EDWARD ⌈aside⌉

Thou liest. She hath not, but I would she had.

AUDLEY

All love and duty to my lord the King.

KING EDWARD ⌈aside⌉

Well, all but one is none. (To Audley) What news with you?

AUDLEY

I have, my liege, levied those horse and foot,

According as your charge, and brought them hither.

KING EDWARD

Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse,

According to our discharge, and be gone.

Derby, I’ll look upon the Countess’ mind anon.

EARL OF DERBY The Countess’ mind, my liege?

KING EDWARD

I mean the Emperor. Leave me alone.

AUDLEY (to Derby)

What is his mind?

EARL OF DERBY Let’s leave him to his humour.

Exeunt Derby and Audley

KING EDWARD

Thus from the heart’s abundance speaks the tongue:

‘Countess’ for ‘Emperor’—and indeed why not?

She is as imperator over me, and I to her

Am as a kneeling vassal that observes

The pleasure or displeasure of her eye.

Enter Lodowick





(To Lodowick) What says the more-than-Cleopatra’s

match

To Caesar now?

LODOWICK That yet, my liege, ere night

She will resolve your majesty.

Sound drum within





KING EDWARD

What drum is this that thunders forth this march

To start the tender Cupid in my bosom?

Poor sheepskin, how it brawls with him that beateth it!

Go, break the thund’ring parchment-bottom out

And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines

Unto the bosom of a heavenly nymph;

For I will use it as my writing paper,

And so reduce him from a scolding drum

To be the herald, and dear counsel-bearer,

Betwixt a goddess and a mighty king.

Go, bid the drummer learn to touch the lute,

Or hang him in the braces of his drum;

For now we think it an uncivil thing

To trouble heaven with such harsh resounds. Away!

Exit Lodowick

The quarrel that I have requires no arms

But these of mine, and these shall meet my foe

In a deep march of penetrable groans.

My eyes shall be my arrows, and my sighs

Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind

To whirl away my sweet’st artillery.

Ah, but alas, she wins the sun of me,

For that is she herself, and thence it comes

That poets term the wanton warrior blind.

But love hath eyes as judgement to his steps,

Till too much loved glory dazzles them—

Enter Lodowick





How now?

LODOWICK

My liege, the drum that struck the lusty march

Stands with Prince Edward, your thrice-valiant son.

⌈Exit⌉

Enter Edward, Prince of Wales





KING EDWARD

I see the boy. ⌈Aside⌉ O, how his mother’s face,

Modelled in his, corrects my strayed desire,

And rates my heart, and chides my thievish eye,

Who, being rich enough in seeing her,

Yet seek elsewhere; and basest theft is that

Which cannot cloak itself in poverty.

(To the Prince) Now, boy, what news?

PRINCE OF WALES

I have assembled, my dear lord and father,

The choicest buds of all our English blood

For our affairs to France, and here we come

To take direction from your majesty.

KING EDWARD (aside)

Still do I see in him delineate

His mother’s visage. Those his eyes are hers,

Who looking wistly on me make me blush.

For faults against themselves give evidence;

Lust is a fire, and men, like lanterns, show

Light lust within themselves, even through themselves.

Away, loose silks o’er wavering vanity!

Shall the large limit of fair Brittany

By me be overthrown, and shall I not

Master this little mansion of myself?

Give me an armour of eternal steel:

I go to conquer kings; and shall I not then

Subdue myself and be my enemy’s friend?

It must not be. (To the Prince) Come, boy! Forward!

Advance!





Let’s with our colours sweet the air of France.

Enter Lodowick





LODOWICK (to the King)

My liege, the Countess, with a smiling cheer,

Desires access unto your majesty.

KING EDWARD (aside)

Why there it goes. That very smile of hers

Hath ransomed captive France and set the King,

The Dauphin and the peers at liberty.

(To the Prince) Go, leave me, Ned, and revel with thy friends.

Exit the Prince of Wales

(Aside) Thy mother is but black, and thou, like her,

Dost put it in my mind how foul she is.

(To Lodowick) Go, fetch the Countess hither in thy hand—

Exit Lodowick

And let her chase away these winter clouds,

For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth.

The sin is more to hack and hew poor men

Than to embrace in an unlawful bed

The register of all rarieties

Since leathern Adam till this youngest hour.

Enter Lodowick ⌈leading in by the hand⌉ the Countess of Salisbury





Go, Lod’wick, put thy hand into my purse—

Play, spend, give, riot, waste, do what thou wilt

So thou wilt hence awhile and leave me here.

Exit Lodowick

(To the Countess) Now, my soul’s playfellow, art thou come

To speak the more-than-heavenly word of ‘yea’

To my objection in thy beauteous love?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

My father on his blessing hath commanded—

KING EDWARD

That thou shalt yield to me.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Ay, dear my liege, your due.

KING EDWARD

And that, my dearest love, can be no less

Than right for right, and render love for love.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Than wrong for wrong, and endless hate for hate.

But sith I see your majesty so bent

That my unwillingness, my husband’s love,

Your high estate, nor no respect respected

Can be my help, but that your mightiness

Will overbear and awe these dear regards,

I bind my discontent to thy content,

And what I would not ill compel I will,

Provided that yourself remove those lets

That stand between your highness’ love and mine.

KING EDWARD

Name them, fair Countess, and by heaven I will.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

It is their lives that stand between our love

That I would have choked up, my sovereign.

KING EDWARD

Whose lives, my lady?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY My thrice-loving liege,

Your Queen and Salisbury, my wedded husband,

Who, living, have that title in our love

That we cannot bestow but by their death.

KING EDWARD

Their opposition is beyond our law.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

So is your desire. If the law

Can hinder you to execute the one,

Let it forbid you to attempt the other.

I cannot think you love me as you say

Unless you do make good what you have sworn.

KING EDWARD

No more. Thy husband and the Queen shall die.

Fairer thou art by far than Hero was;

Beardless Leander not so strong as I.

He swam an easy current for his love,

But I will through a Hellespont of blood

To arrive at Sestos, where my Hero lies.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Nay, you’ll do more. You’ll make the river too

With their heart bloods that keep our love asunder,

Of which my husband and your wife are twain.

KING EDWARD

Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death,

And gives in evidence that they shall die—

Upon which verdict I, their judge, condemn them.

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

O, perjured beauty! More corrupted judge!

When to the great star chamber o‘er our heads

The universal sessions calls to ’count

This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.

KING EDWARD

What says my fair love? Is she resolute?

COUNTESS OF SALISBURY

Resolved to be dissolved, and therefore this:

Keep but thy word, great King, and I am thine.

Stand where thou dost—I’ll part a little from thee—

She moves away from the King





⌈kneeling⌉ And see how I will yield me to thy hands.

Here, by my side, doth hang my wedding knives.

She reveals two knives





Take thou the one,

She offers a knife to the King





and with it kill thy Queen,

And learn by me to find her where she lies;

And with this other

She turns the other knife on herself





I’ll dispatch my love,

Which now lies fast asleep within my heart.

When they are gone, then I’ll consent to love.

Stir not, lascivious King, to hinder me.

My resolution is more nimbler far

Than thy prevention can be in my rescue.

An if thou stir, I strike. Therefore stand still,

And hear the choice that I will put thee to.

Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit

And never henceforth to solicit me,

Or else, by heaven, this sharp-pointed knife

Shall stain thy earth with that which thou wouldst stain—

My poor, chaste blood. Swear, Edward, swear,

Or I will strike and die before thee here.

KING EDWARD

Even by that power I swear, that gives me now

The power to be ashamed of myself,

I never mean to part my lips again

In any words that tends to such a suit.

Arise, true English lady, whom our isle

May better boast of than ever Roman might

Of her, whose ransacked treasury hath tasked

The vain endeavour of so many pens.

Arise, and be my fault thy honour’s fame

Which after-ages shall enrich thee with.

I am awakèd from this idle dream.

⌈The Countess stands⌉





(Calling) Warwick, my son, Derby, Artois and Audley—

Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?

Enter all the peers: the Earl of Warwick, the

Prince of Wales, the Earl of Derby, the Comte d’Artois and Lord Audley





Warwick, I make thee Warden of the North.

Thou, Prince of Wales, and Audley, straight to sea,

Scour to Newhaven—some there stay for me.

Myself, Artois and Derby will through Flanders

To greet our friends there and to crave their aid.

This night will scarce suffice me to discover

My folly’s siege against a faithful lover,

For ere the sun shall gild the eastern sky

We’ll wake him with our martial harmony.

Exeunt





Sc. 4 Enter Jean King of France, his two sons (the Dauphin and Prince Philippe) and the Duc de Lorraine



KING OF FRANCE

Here, till our navy of a thousand sail

Have made a breakfast to our foe by sea,

Let us encamp to wait their happy speed.

Lorraine, what readiness is Edward in?

How hast thou heard that he provided is

Of martial furniture for this exploit?

DUC DE LORRAINE

To lay aside unnecessary soothing,

And not to spend the time in circumstance,

’Tis bruited for a certainty, my lord,

That he’s exceeding strongly fortified.

His subjects flock as willingly to war

As if unto a triumph they were led.

DAUPHIN

England was wont to harbour malcontents,

Bloodthirsty and seditious Catilines,

Spendthrifts, and such as gape for nothing else

But change and alteration of the state.

And is it possible

That they are now so loyal in themselves?

DUC DE LORRAINE

All but the Scot, who solemnly protests,

As heretofore I have informed his grace,

Never to sheathe his sword or take a truce.

KING OF FRANCE

Ah, that’s the anch’rage of some better hope.

But on the other side, to think what friends

King Edward hath retained in Netherland,

Among those ever-bibbing epicures—

Those frothy Dutchmen, puffed with double beer,

That drink and swill in every place they come—

Doth not a little aggravate mine ire.

Besides, we hear the Emperor conjoins

And stalls him in his own authority.

But all the mightier that their number is

The greater glory reaps the victory!

Some friends have we beside domestic power—

The stern Polonian and the warlike Dane,

The King of Bohême, and of Sicily,

Are all become confederates with us

And, as I think, are marching hither apace—

Sound drums within





But soft, I hear the music of their drums,

By which I guess that their approach is near.

Enter ⌈at one door⌉ the King of Bohemia with Danish soldiers ⌈and a drummer⌉. Enter ⌈at another door⌉ a Polish captain with Muscovite and Polish soldiers ⌈and a drummer⌉





KING OF BOHEMIA

King Jean of France, as league and neighbourhood

Requires when friends are any way distressed,

I come to aid thee with my country’s force.

POLISH CAPTAIN (to the King of France)

And from great Moscow, fearful to the Turk,

And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,

I bring these servitors to fight for thee,

Who willingly will venture in thy cause.

KING OF FRANCE

Welcome, Bohemian king, and welcome all.

This your great kindness I will not forget.

Besides your plentiful rewards in crowns

That from our treasury ye shall receive,

There comes a harebrained nation, decked in pride,

The spoil of whom will be a treble gain.

And now my hope is full, my joy complete.

At sea we are as puissant as the force

Of Agamemnon in the haven of Troy.

By land, with Xerxes we compare of strength,

Whose soldiers drank up rivers in their thirst.

Then, Bayard-like, blind overweening Ned,

To reach at our imperial diadem

Is either to be swallowed of the waves,

Or hacked a-pieces when thou com’st ashore.

Enter a French Mariner





MARINER

Near to the coast I have descried, my lord,

As I was busy in my watchful charge,

The proud armada of King Edward’s ships,

Which, at the first far off when I did ken,

Seemed as it were a grove of withered pines,

But drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,

Their streaming ensigns wrought of coloured silk,

Like to a meadow full of sundry flowers,

Adorns the naked bosom of the earth.

Majestical the order of their course,

Figuring the hornèd circle of the moon,

And on the top gallant of the admiral,

And likewise all the handmaids of his train,

The arms of England and of France unite

Are quartered equally by herald’s art.

Thus titely carried with a merry gale

They plough the ocean hitherward amain.

KING OF FRANCE

Dare he already crop the fleur-de-lis?

I hope, the honey being gathered thence,

He, with the spider, afterward approached,

Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves.

But where’s our navy? How are they prepared

To wing themselves against this flight of ravens?

MARINER

They, having knowledge brought them by the scouts,

Did break from anchor straight and, puffed with rage,

No otherwise than were their sails with wind,

Made forth as when the empty eagle flies

To satisfy his hungry, griping maw.

KING OF FRANCE (giving money)

There’s for thy news. Return unto thy barque,

And if thou scape the bloody stroke of war

And do survive the conflict, come again,

And let us hear the manner of the fight. Exit Mariner

Mean space, my lords, ’tis best we be dispersed

To several places, lest they chance to land.

(To the King of Bohemia) First you, my lord, with your Bohemian troops,

Shall pitch your battles on the lower hand.

(To the Dauphin ⌈and the Polish captain⌉)

My eldest son, the Duke of Normandy,

Together with this aid of Muscovites,

Shall climb the higher ground another way.

Here in the middle coast, betwixt you both,

Philippe, my youngest boy, and I will lodge.

So, lords, be gone, and look unto your charge,

You stand for France, an empire fair and large.

Exeunt all but the King of France and Prince Philippe





Now tell me, Philippe, what is thy conceit

Touching the challenge that the English make?

PRINCE PHILIPPE

I say, my lord, claim Edward what he can,

And bring he ne‘er so plain a pedigree,

’Tis you are in possession of the crown,

And that’s the surest point of all the law.

But were it not, yet ere he should prevail

I’ll make a conduit of my dearest blood,

Or chase those straggling upstarts home again.

KING OF FRANCE

Well said, young Philippe! ⌈To an attendant⌉ Call for bread and wine

That we may cheer our stomachs with repast

To look our foes more sternly in the face.

Bread and wine are brought forth. The battle is heard afar off. The King and Prince Philippe sup





Now is begun the heavy day at sea.

Fight, Frenchmen, fight! Be like the field of bears

When they defend their younglings in their caves.

Steer, angry Nemesis, the happy helm

That with the sulphur battles of your rage

The English fleet may be dispersed and sunk.

A cannon shot within





PRINCE PHILIPPE

O, father, how this echoing cannon shot,

Like sweet harmony, digests my cates!

KING OF FRANCE

Now, boy, thou hear‘st what thund’ring terror ’tis

To buckle for a kingdom’s sovereignty.

The earth, with giddy trembling when it shakes,

Or when the exhalations of the air

Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,

Affrights not more than kings when they dispose

To show the rancour of their high-swoll’n hearts.

Retreat sounds within





Retreat is sounded—one side hath the worse.

O, if it be the French, sweet fortune turn,

And in thy turning, change the froward winds

That, with advantage of a favouring sky,

Our men may vanquish, and the other fly.

Enter the French Mariner





My heart misgives. (To the Mariner) Say, mirror of

pale death,

To whom belongs the honour of this day?

Relate, I pray thee, if thy breath will serve

The sad discourse of this discomfiture.

MARINER I will, my lord.

My gracious sovereign, France hath ta‘en the foil,

And boasting Edward triumphs with success.

These iron-hearted navies,

When last I was reporter to your grace,

Both full of angry spleen, of hope and fear,

Hasting to meet each other in the face,

At last conjoined, and by their admiral

Our admiral encountered many shot.

By this, the other, that beheld these twain

Give earnest-penny of a further wreck,

Like fiery dragons took their haughty flight;

And likewise meeting, from their smoky wombs

Sent many grim ambassadors of death.

Then ’gan the day to turn to gloomy night,

And darkness did as well enclose the quick

As those that were but newly reft of life.

No leisure served for friends to bid farewell,

And if it had, the hideous noise was such

As each to other seemed deaf and dumb.

Purple the sea whose channel filled as fast

With streaming gore that from the maimed fell,

As did her gushing moisture break into

The cranny cleftures of the through-shot planks.

Here flew a head dissevered from the trunk;

There mangled arms and legs were tossed aloft,

As when a whirlwind takes the summer dust

And scatters it in middle of the air.

Then might ye see the reeling vessels split

And, tottering, sink into the ruthless flood

Until their lofty tops were seen no more.

All shifts were tried, both for defence and hurt.

And now the effect of valour and of fear,

Of resolution and of cowardice,

We lively pictured—how the one for fame,

The other by compulsion, laid about.

Much did the Nonpareil, that brave ship;

So did the Black Snake of Boulogne, than which

A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail.

But all in vain: both sun, the wind and tide

Revolted all unto our foemen’s side,

That we, perforce, were fain to give them way,

And they are landed. Thus my tale is done.

We have untimely lost, and they have won.

KING OF FRANCE

Then rests there nothing but, with present speed,

To join our several forces all in one,

And bid them battle ere they range too far.

Come, gentle Philippe, let us hence depart;

This soldier’s words have pierced thy father’s heart.

Exeunt





Sc. 5 Enter at one door two Frenchmen without baggage. Enter at another door, meeting them, other Frenchmen and a Frenchwoman with two little children, ⌈all⌉ with baggage



FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE

Well met, my masters. How now? What’s the news,

And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff?

What, is it quarter-day, that you remove,

And carry bag and baggage too?

FIRST FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

Quarter-day, ay, and quartering day I fear.

Have ye not heard the news that flies abroad?

FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE What news?

SECOND FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

How the French navy is destroyed at sea,

And that the English army is arrived.

FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE What then?

FIRST FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

‘What then,’ quoth you? Why, is’t not time to fly,

When envy and destruction is so nigh?

FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE

Content thee, man, they are far enough from hence,

And will be met, I warrant ye, to their cost,

Before they break so far into the realm.

FIRST FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

Ay, so the grasshopper doth spend the time

In mirthful jollity, till winter come,

And then, too late, he would redeem his time,

When frozen cold hath nipped his careless head.

He that no sooner will provide a cloak

Than when he sees it doth begin to rain

May, peradventure, for his negligence,

Be throughly washed when he suspects it not.

We that have charge, and such a train as this,

Must look in time to look for them and us,

Lest, when we would, we cannot be relieved.

FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE

Belike you then despair of ill success,

And think your country will be subjugate.

SECOND FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

We cannot tell. ’Tis good to fear the worst.

FRENCHMAN WITHOUT BAGGAGE

Yet rather fight, than like unnatural sons

Forsake your loving parents in distress.

FIRST FRENCHMAN WITH BAGGAGE

Tush, they that have already taken arms

Are many fearful millions in respect

Of that small handful of our enemies.

But ’tis a rightful quarrel must prevail:

Edward is son unto our late king’s sister,

Where Jean Valois is three degrees removed.

FRENCHWOMAN

Besides, there goes a prophecy abroad,

Published by one that was a friar once,

Whose oracles have many times proved true,

And now he says the time will shortly come

Whenas a lion roused in the west

Shall carry hence the fleur-de-lis of France.

These, I can tell ye, and such like surmises,

Strike many Frenchmen cold unto the heart.

Enter a Frenchman in haste





FLEEING FRENCHMAN

Fly, countrymen and citizens of France!

Sweet-flow’ring peace, the root of happy life,

Is quite abandoned and expulsed the land.

Instead of whom, ransack-constraining war

Sits like to ravens upon your houses’ tops.

Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets

And, unrestrained, make havoc as they pass,

The form whereof, even now, myself beheld

Upon this fair mountain, whence I came.

For so far off as I directed mine eyes

I might perceive five cities all on fire,

Cornfields and vineyards burning like an oven,

And, as the reeking vapour in the wind

Y-turnèd but aside, I likewise might discern

The poor inhabitants, escaped the flame,

Fall numberless upon the soldiers’ pikes.

Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath

Do tread the measures of their tragic march:

Upon the right hand comes the conquering King,

Upon the left his hot, unbridled son,

And in the midst their nation’s glittering host.

All which, though distant, yet conspire in one

To leave a desolation where they come.

Fly, therefore, citizens, if you be wise.

Seek out some habitation further off.

Here, if you stay, your wives will be abused,

Your treasure shared before your weeping eyes.

Shelter you yourselves, for now the storm doth rise.

Away, away! Methinks I hear their drums!

Ah, wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall;

Thy glory shaketh like a tottering wall.

Exeunt





Sc. 6 Enter King Edward and the Earl of Derby with soldiers and Gobin de Grace



KING EDWARD

Where is the Frenchman by whose cunning guide

We found the shallow of this river Somme,

And had direction how to pass the sea?

GOBIN

Here, my good lord.

KING EDWARD

How art thou called? Tell me thy name.

GOBIN

Gobin de Grace, if please your excellence.

KING EDWARD

Then, Gobin, for the service thou hast done

We here enlarge and give thee liberty,

And for a recompense, beside this good,

Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold.

(To Derby) I know not how we should have missed our son,

Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.

Enter the Comte d’Artois





COMTE D’ARTOIS

Good news, my lord! The Prince is hard at hand,

And with him comes Lord Audley and the rest

Whom, since our landing, we could never meet.

Enter Edward Prince of Wales, Lord Audley and soldiers





KING EDWARD

Welcome, fair Prince. How hast thou sped, my son,

Since thy arrival on the coast of France?

PRINCE OF WALES

Successfully, I thank the gracious heavens.

Some of their strongest cities we have won—

As Harfleur, Lô, Crotoy and Carentan—

And others wasted, leaving at our heels

A wide, apparent field and beaten path

For solitariness to progress in.

Yet those that would submit we kindly pardoned,

For who in scorn refused our proffered peace

Endured the penalty of sharp revenge.

KING EDWARD

Ah, France, why shouldst thou be this obstinate

Against the kind embracement of thy friends?

How gently had we thought to touch thy breast

And set our foot upon thy tender mould,

But that in froward and disdainful pride

Thou, like a skittish and untamed colt,

Dost start aside and strike us with thy heels.

But tell me, Ned, in all thy warlike course

Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France?

PRINCE OF WALES

Yes, my good lord, and not two hours ago,

With full a hundred thousand fighting men

Upon the one side with the river’s bank,

And on the other, both his multitudes.

I feared he would have cropped our smaller power,

But happily, perceiving your approach,

He hath withdrawn himself to Crécy plains,

Where, as it seemeth by his good array,

He means to bid us battle presently.

KING EDWARD

He shall be welcome. That’s the thing we crave.

Enter Jean King of France, the Dauphin, the

Duc de Lorraine, the King of Bohemia, young

Prince Philippe and soldiers





KING OF FRANCE

Edward, know that Jean, the true King of France,

Musing thou shouldst encroach upon his land

And, in thy tyrannous proceeding, slay

His faithful subjects and subvert his towns,

Spits in thy face, and, in this manner following,

Upbraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion.

First, I condemn thee for a fugitive,

A thievish pirate and a needy mate,

One that hath either no abiding-place

Or else, inhabiting some barren soil,

Where neither herb or fruitful grain is had,

Dost altogether live by pilfering.

Next, insomuch thou hast infringed thy faith,

Broke league and solemn covenant made with me,

I hold thee for a false, pernicious wretch.

And last of all, although I scorn to cope

With one so much inferior to myself,

Yet in respect thy thirst is all for gold,

Thy labour rather to be feared than loved,

To satisfy thy lust, in either part,

Here am I come and with me have I brought

Exceeding store of treasure, pearl and coin.

Leave, therefore, now to persecute the weak,

And armed ent‘ring conflict with the armed,

Let it be seen, ’mongst other petty thefts,

How thou canst win this pillage manfully.

KING EDWARD

If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,

Then is thy salutation honey sweet.

But as the one hath no such property,

So is the other most satirical.

Yet wot how I regard thy worthless taunts.

If thou have uttered them to soil my fame,

Or dim the reputation of my birth,

Know that thy wolvish barking cannot hurt.

If slyly to insinuate with the world,

And with a strumpet’s artificial lime

To paint thy vicious and deformed cause,

Be well assured the counterfeit will fade,

And in the end thy foul defects be seen.

But if thou didst it to provoke me on,

As who should say I were but timorous,

Or, coldly negligent, did need a spur,

Bethink thyself how slack I was at sea,

How, since my landing, I have won no towns,

Entered no further but upon the coast,

And there have ever since securely slept.

But if I have been otherwise employed,

Imagine, Valois, whether I intend

To skirmish, not for pillage, but for the crown

Which thou dost wear and that I vow to have,

Or one of us shall fall into his grave.

PRINCE OF WALES

Look not for cross invectives at our hands,

Or railing execrations of despite.

Let creeping serpents hid in hollow banks

Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,

And they shall plead for us and our affairs.

Yet thus much briefly, by my father’s leave,

As all the immodest poison of thy throat

Is scandalous and most notorious lies,

And our pretended quarrel is truly just,

So end the battle when we meet today:

May either of us prosper and prevail

Or, luckless cursed, receive eternal shame.

KING EDWARD

That needs no further question, and I know

His conscience witnesseth it is my right.

Therefore, Valois, say: wilt thou yet resign

Before the sickle’s thrust into the corn,

Or that enkindled fury turn to flame?

KING OF FRANCE

Edward, I know what right thou hast in France,

And ere I basely will resign my crown

This champaign field shall be a pool of blood,

And all our prospect as a slaughterhouse.

PRINCE OF WALES

Ay, that approves thee, tyrant, what thou art.

No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,

But one that tears her entrails with thy hands

And, like a thirsty tiger, suck’st her blood.

AUDLEY

You peers of France, why do you follow him

That is so prodigal to spend your lives?

DAUPHIN

Whom should they follow, aged impotent,

But he that is their true-born sovereign?

KING EDWARD

Upbraid’st thou him because within his face

Time hath engraved deep characters of age?

Know that these grave scholars of experience,

Like stiff-grown oaks, will stand immovable

When whirlwind quickly turns up younger trees.

EARL OF DERBY (to the King of France)

Was ever any of thy father’s house

King but thyself before this present time?

(To the French generally) Edward’s great lineage by the

mother’s side

Five hundred years hath held the sceptre up.

Judge then, conspirators, by this descent

Which is the true-born sovereign—this, or that.

PRINCE PHILIPPE (to the King of France)

Father, range your battles. Prate no more.

These English fain would spend the time in words

That, night approaching, they might scape unfought.

KING OF FRANCE

Lords and my loving subjects, now’s the time

That your intended force must bide the touch.

Therefore, my friends, consider this in brief.

He that you fight for is your natural king;

He against whom you fight a foreigner.

He that you fight for rules in clemency,

And reigns you with a mild and gentle bit;

He against whom you fight, if he prevail,

Will straight enthrone himself in tyranny,

Make slaves of you and with a heavy hand

Curtail and curb your sweetest liberty.

Then, to protect your country and your King,

Let but the haughty courage of your hearts

Answer the number of your able hands,

And we shall quickly chase these fugitives.

For what’s this Edward but a belly-god,

A tender and lascivious wantonness,

That th‘other day was almost dead for love?

And what, I pray you, is his goodly guard?

Such as, but scant them of their chines of beef,

And take away their downy feather beds,

And presently they are as resty-stiff

As ’twere a many overridden jades.

Then, Frenchmen, scorn that such should be your lords,

And rather bind ye them in captive bands.

ALL THE FRENCH

Vive le roil God save King Jean of Francel

KING OF FRANCE

Now, on this plain of Crécy, spread yourselves.

And, Edward, when thou dar’st, begin the fight!

Exit with the French

KING EDWARD (calling after)

We presently will meet thee, Jean of France!

(To the English) And, English lords, let us resolve the day

Either to clear us of that scandalous crime

Or be entombed in our innocence.

(To the Prince of Wales) And, Ned, because this battle is the first

That ever yet thou fought’st in pitched field,

As ancient custom is of martialists

To dub thee with the type of chivalry,

In solemn manner we will give thee arms.

Come, therefore, heralds; orderly bring forth

A strong attirement for the Prince my son.

Enter four heralds bringing in a coat armour, a helmet, a lance and a shield





Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,

As with this armour I impale thy breast

So be thy noble, unrelenting heart

Walled in with flint of matchless fortitude

That never base affections enter there.

⌈The Prince of Wales is invested in armour⌉





Fight and be valiant; conquer where thou com’st.

(To Derby, Audley and Artois) Now follow, lords, and do him honour too.

EARL OF DERBY

Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,

As I do set this helmet on thy head

Wherewith the chamber of thy brain is fenced,

So may thy temples with Bellona’s hand

Be still adorned with laurel victory.

⌈The helmet is placed on the Prince of Wales⌉





Fight and be valiant; conquer where thou com’st.

AUDLEY

Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,

Receive this lance into thy manly hand.

Use it in fashion of a brazen pen

To draw forth bloody stratagems in France,

And print thy valiant deeds in honour’s book.

⌈The lance is given to the Prince of Wales⌉





Fight and be valiant; vanquish where thou com’st.

COMTE D’ARTOIS

Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,

Hold, take this target; wear it on thy arm.

And may the view thereof, like Perseus’ shield,

Astonish and transform thy gazing foes

To senseless images of meagre death.

⌈The shield is given to the Prince of Wales⌉





Fight and be valiant; conquer where thou com’st.

KING EDWARD

Now wants there naught but knighthood, which deferred

We leave till thou hast won it in the field.

PRINCE OF WALES

My gracious father and ye forward peers,

This honour you have done me animates

And cheers my green, yet scarce-appearing, strength

With comfortable, good-presaging signs,

No otherwise than did old Jacob’s words

Whenas he breathed his blessings on his sons.

These hallowed gifts of yours, when I profane

Or use them not to glory of my God

To patronage the fatherless and poor,

Or for the benefit of England’s peace,

Be numb my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,

Wither my heart that, like a sapless tree,

I may remain the map of infamy.

KING EDWARD

Then thus our steeled battles shall be ranged.

(To the Prince of Wales) The leading of the vanguard, Ned, is thine,

To dignify whose lusty spirit the more

We temper it with Audley’s gravity,

That courage and experience, joined in one,

Your manège may be second unto none.

(To all) For the main battles I will guide myself,

And Derby in the rearward march behind,

That orderly disposed and set in ’ray

Let us to horse, and God grant us the day!

Exeunt





Sc. 7 Alarum. Enter and exit a many Frenchmen flying. Chasing after them, enter and exit Edward Prince of Wales running. Then enter Jean King of France and the Due de Lorraine



KING OF FRANCE

O Lorraine, say: what mean our men to fly?

Our number is far greater than our foes.

DUC DE LORRAINE

The garrison of Genoese, my lord,

That came from Paris, weary with their march,

Grudging to be so suddenly employed,

No sooner in the forefront took their place,

But straight retiring, so dismayed the rest

As likewise they betook themselves to flight,

In which, for haste to make a safe escape,

More in the clustering throng are pressed to death

Than by the enemy a thousandfold.

KING OF FRANCE

O, hapless fortune! Let us yet assay

If we can counsel some of them to stay.

Exeunt





Sc. 8 Enter King Edward and Lord Audley



KING EDWARD

Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,

Withdraw our powers unto this little hill,

And here a season let us breathe ourselves.

AUDLEY I will, my lord. Exit

Sound retreat within





KING EDWARD

Just-dooming heaven, whose secret providence

To our gross judgement is inscrutable,

How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works

That hast, this day, given way unto the right,

And made the wicked stumble at themselves?

Enter the Comte d’Artois





COMTE D’ARTOIS

Rescue, King Edward! Rescue for thy son!

KING EDWARD

Rescue, Artois? What, is he prisoner,

Or fell by violence beside his horse?

COMTE D’ARTOIS

Neither, my lord, but narrowly beset

With turning Frenchmen, whom he did pursue,

As ’tis impossible that he should scape

Except your highness presently descend.

KING EDWARD

Tut, let him fight. We gave him arms today,

And he is labouring for a knighthood, man!

Enter the Earl of Derby





EARL OF DERBY

The Prince, my lord, the Prince! O, succour him!

He’s close encompassed with a world of odds.

KING EDWARD

Then will he win a world of honour too

If he by valour can redeem him thence.

If not, what remedy? We have more sons

Than one to comfort our declining age.

Enter Lord Audley





AUDLEY

Renowned Edward, give me leave, I pray,

To lead my soldiers where I may relieve

Your grace’s son, in danger to be slain.

The snares of French, like emmets on a bank,

Muster about him whilst he, lion-like,

Entangled in the net of their assaults,

Franticly rends and bites the woven toil.

But all in vain. He cannot free himself.

KING EDWARD

Audley, content. I will not have a man,

On pain of death, sent forth to succour him.

This is the day ordained by destiny

To season his green courage with those grievous

thoughts

That, if he breaketh out, Nestor’s years on earth

Will make him savour still of this exploit.

EARL OF DERBY

Ah, but he shall not live to see those days!

KING EDWARD

Why, then, his epitaph is lasting praise.

AUDLEY

Yet, good my lord, ’tis too much wilfulness

To let his blood be spilt, that may be saved.

KING EDWARD

Exclaim no more, for none of you can tell

Whether a borrowed aid will serve or no.

Perhaps he is already slain or ta’en.

And dare a falcon when she’s in her flight,

And ever after she’ll be haggard-like.

Let Edward be delivered by our hands

And, still in danger, he’ll expect the like.

But if himself himself redeem from thence,

He will have vanquished, cheerful, death and fear,

And ever after dread their force no more

Than if they were but babes or captive slaves.

AUDLEY

O cruel father! Farewell Edward, then.

EARL OF DERBY

Farewell, sweet Prince, the hope of chivalry.

COMTE D’ARTOIS

O, would my life might ransom him from death!

Trumpets sound retreat within





KING EDWARD But soft—methinks I hear

The dismal charge of trumpets’ loud retreat.

All are not slain, I hope, that went with him.

Some will return with tidings, good or bad.

Enter Edward Prince of Wales in triumph, bearing in his hand his shivered lance. The body of the King of Bohemia is borne before, wrapped in the colours of Bohemia. The English run and embrace the Prince





AUDLEY

O, joyful sight! Victorious Edward lives!

EARL OF DERBY

Welcome, brave Prince.

KINC EDWARD

Welcome, Plantagenet.

The Prince kneels and kisses his father’s hand





PRINCE OF WALES

First, having done my duty as beseemed,

Lords, I regreet you all with hearty thanks.

And now behold after my winter’s toil

My painful voyage on the boist’rous sea

Of war’s devouring gulfs and steely rocks

I bring my freight unto the wished port,

My summer’s hope, my travail’s sweet reward.

(Pointing at Bohemia’s body) And here, with humble duty, I present

This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,

Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death:

The King of Bohême, father, whom I slew,

Whose thousands had entrenched me round about,

And lay as thick upon my battered crest

As on an anvil with their ponderous glaives.

Yet marble courage still did underprop,

And when my weary arms with often blows,

Like the continual labouring woodman’s axe

That is enjoined to fell a load of oaks,

Began to falter, straight I would recover

My gifts you gave me and my zealous vow,

And then new courage made me fresh again

That, in despite, I carved my passage forth,

And put the multitude to speedy flight.

Lo, thus hath Edward’s hand filled your request

And done, I hope, the duty of a knight.

His sword borne forth by a soldier





KING EDWARD

Ay, well thou hast deserved a knighthood, Ned,

He takes the sword

And therefore, with thy sword yet reeking warm

With blood of those that fought to be thy bane,

He knights the Prince





Arise Prince Edward, trusty knight-at-arms.

This day thou hast confounded me with joy

And proved thyself fit heir unto a king.

PRINCE OF WALES (rising, and then giving the King a paper)

Here is a note, my gracious lord, of those

That in this conflict of our foes were slain:

Eleven princes of esteem, fourscore barons,

A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand

Common soldiers—and of our men, a thousand.

KING EDWARD

Our God be praised! Now, Jean of France, I hope

Thou know’st King Edward for no wantonness,

No love-sick cockney, nor his soldiers jades.

But which way is the fearful King escaped?

PRINCE OF WALES

Towards Poitiers, noble father, and his sons.

KING EDWARD

Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still.

Myself and Derby will to Calais straight,

And there begirt that haven town with siege.

Now lies it on an upshot: therefore, strike,

And wistly follow whiles the game’s on foot. Exeunt





Sc. 9 Enter the Comte de Montfort with a coronet in his hand and with him the Earl of Salisbury



COMTE DE MONTFORT

My lord of Salisbury, since by your aid

Mine enemy Sir Charles of Blois is slain,

And I again am quietly possessed

In Bretagne’s dukedom, know that I resolve,

For this kind furtherance of your king and you,

To swear allegiance to his majesty—

He offers Salisbury the coronet





In sign whereof receive this coronet.

Bear it unto him, and withal mine oath

Never to be but Edward’s faithful friend.

EARL OF SALISBURY (taking the coronet)

I take it, Montfort. Thus I hope ere long

The whole dominions of the realm of France

Will be surrendered to his conquering hand.

Exit Montfort





Now, if I knew but safely how to pass,

I would at Calais gladly meet his grace,

Whither I am by letters certified

That he intends to have his host removed.

It shall be so. This policy will serve.

(Calling) Ho, who’s within? Bring Villiers to me.

Enter Villiers





Villiers, thou know’st thou art my prisoner,

And that I might for ransom, if I would,

Require of thee a hundred thousand francs,

Or else retain and keep thee captive still.

But so it is that for a smaller charge

Thou mayst be quit, an if thou wilt thyself.

And this it is: procure me but a passport

Of Charles, the Duke of Normandy, that I

Without restraint may have recourse to Calais

Through all the countries where he hath to do—

Which thou mayst easily obtain, I think,

By reason I have often heard thee say

He and thou were students once together—

And then thou shalt be set at liberty.

How sayst thou? Wilt thou undertake to do it?

VILLIERS

I will, my lord. But I must speak with him.

EARL OF SALISBURY

Why, so thou shalt! Take horse and post from hence—

Only before thou go’st, swear by thy faith

That if thou canst not compass my desire,

Thou wilt return my prisoner back again,

And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.

VILLIERS

To that condition I agree, my lord,

And will unfeignedly perform the same.

Exit

EARL or SALISBURY Farewell, Villiers!

Thus once I mean to try a Frenchman’s faith.

Exit





Sc. 10 Enter King Edward and the Earl of Derby with soldiers



KING EDWARD

Since they refuse our proffered league, my lord,

And will not ope their gates and let us in,

We will entrench ourselves on every side,

That neither victuals nor supply of men

May come to succour this accursed town.

Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.

Enter six poor Frenchmen





EARL OF DERBY

The promised aid that made them stand aloof

Is now retired and gone another way.

It will repent them of their stubborn will.

But what are these poor, ragged slaves, my lord?

KING EDWARD

Ask what they are. It seems they come from Calais.

EARL OF DERBY (to the poor Frenchmen)

You wretched patterns of despair and woe—

What are you? Living men, or gliding ghosts

Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth?

POOR MAN

No ghosts, my lord, but men that breathe a life

Far worse than is the quiet sleep of death.

We are distressed poor inhabitants

That long have been diseased, sick and lame.

And now, because we are not fit to serve,

The Captain of the town hath thrust us forth

That so expense of victuals may be saved.

KING EDWARD

A charitable deed, no doubt, and worthy praise!

But how do you imagine, then, to speed?

We are your enemies: in such a case

We can no less but put ye to the sword,

Since, when we proffered truce, it was refused.

POOR MAN

An if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,

As welcome death is unto us as life.

KING EDWARD

Poor seely men, much wronged, and more distressed!

Go, Derby, go, and see they be relieved.

Command that victuals be appointed them,

And give to every one five crowns apiece.

Exeunt the Earl of Derby and the six poor Frenchmen

The lion scorns to touch the yielding prey,

And Edward’s sword must fresh itself in such

As wilful stubbornness hath made perverse.

Enter Lord Percy





Lord Percy, welcome. What’s the news in England?

PERCY

The Queen, my lord, commends her to your grace,

And from her highness and the lord vicegerent

I bring this happy tidings of success:

David of Scotland, lately up in arms,

Thinking belike he soonest should prevail—

Your highness being absent from the realm—

Is by the fruitful service of your peers

And painful travail of the Queen herself—

That, big with child, was every day in arms—

Vanquished, subdued and taken prisoner.

KING EDWARD

Thanks, Percy, for thy news, with all my heart!

What was he took him prisoner in the field?

PERCY

A squire, my lord. John Copland is his name,

Who, since entreated by her majesty,

Denies to make surrender of his prize

To any but unto your grace alone—

Whereat the Queen is grievously displeased.

KING EDWARD

Well then, we’ll have a pursuivant dispatched

To summon Copland hither out of hand,

And with him he shall bring his prisoner-king.

PERCY

The Queen, my lord, herself by this at sea,

And purposeth, as soon as wind will serve,

To land at Calais, and to visit you.

KING EDWARD

She shall be welcome, and to wait her coming

I’ll pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.

Enter a Captain of Calais





CAPTAIN OF CALAIS

The burgesses of Calais, mighty king,

Have, by a council, willingly decreed

To yield the town and castle to your hands

Upon condition it will please your grace

To grant them benefit of life and goods.

KING EDWARD

They will so? Then, belike, they may command,

Dispose, elect and govern as they list!

No, sirrah. Tell them, since they did refuse

Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,

They shall not have it now, although they would.

I will accept of naught but fire and sword—

Except within these two days, six of them,

That are the wealthiest merchants in the town,

Come naked all but for their linen shirts,

With each a halter hanged about his neck,

And, prostrate, yield themselves upon their knees

To be afflicted, hanged or what I please.

And so you may inform their masterships.

Exeunt all but the Captain

CAPTAIN OF CALAIS

Why, this it is to trust a broken staff. Had we not been persuaded Jean, our king, Would, with his army, have relieved the town, We had not stood upon defiance so. But now ’tis past that no man can recall, 84 And better some do go to wreck than all.

Exit





Sc. 11 Enter the Dauphin and Villiers with a paper



DAUPHIN

I wonder, Villiers, thou shouldst importune me

For one that is our deadly enemy.

VILLIERS

Not for his sake, my gracious lord, so much

Am I become an earnest advocate

As that, thereby, my ransom will be quit.

DAUPHIN

Thy ransom, man? Why need’st thou talk of that?

Art thou not free? And are not all occasions

That happen for advantage of our foes

To be accepted of and stood upon?

VILLIERS

No, good my lord, except the same be just.

For profit must with honour be commixed,

Or else our actions are but scandalous.

But, letting pass these intricate objections,

Will’t please your highness to subscribe or no?

DAUPHIN

Villiers, I will not nor I cannot do it.

Salisbury shall not have his will so much

To claim a passport how it pleaseth him.

VILLIERS

Why then, I know the extremity, my lord.

I must return to prison, whence I came.

DAUPHIN Return? I hope thou wilt not!

What bird that hath escaped the fowler’s gin

Will not beware how she’s ensnared again?

Or what is he so senseless and secure

That, having hardly passed a dangerous gulf,

Will put himself in peril there again?

VILLIERS

Ah, but it is mine oath, my gracious lord,

Which I in conscience may not violate—

Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.

DAUPHIN

Thine oath? Why, that doth bind thee to abide.

Hast thou not sworn obedience to thy Prince?

VILLIERS

In all things that uprightly he commands.

But either to persuade or threaten me

Not to perform the covenant of my word

Is lawless, and I need not to obey.

DAUPHIN

Why, is it lawful for a man to kill,

And not to break a promise with his foe?

VILLIERS

To kill, my lord, when war is once proclaimed,

So that our quarrel be for wrongs received,

No doubt is lawfully permitted us.

But in an oath, we must be well advised

How we do swear, and when we once have sworn,

Not to infringe it, though we die therefor.

Therefore, my lord, as willing I return

As if I were to fly to paradise.

He begins to leave





DAUPHIN

Stay, my Villiers. Thine honourable mind

Deserves to be eternally admired.

Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferred.

Give me the paper. I’ll subscribe to it.

Villiers gives him the paper, which the Dauphin signs





And wheretofore I loved thee as Villiers,

Hereafter I’ll embrace thee as myself.

Stay, and be still in favour with thy lord.

VILLIERS (receiving back the paper)

I humbly thank your grace. I must dispatch

And send this passport first unto the Earl,

And then I will attend your highness’ pleasure.

DAUPHIN

Do so, Villiers. And Charles, when he hath need,

Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed.

Exit Villiers

Enter ⌉ean King of France





KING OF FRANCE

Come, Charles, and arm thee. Edward is entrapped.

The Prince of Wales is fall’n into our hands,

And we have compassed him. He cannot scape.

DAUPHIN

But will your highness fight today?

KING OF FRANCE

What else, my son? He’s scarce eight thousand strong,

And we are threescore thousand at the least.

DAUPHIN

I have a prophecy, my gracious lord,

Wherein is written what success is like

To happen us in this outrageous war.

It was delivered me at Crécy’s field

By one that is an aged hermit there:

‘When feathered fowl shall make thine army tremble,

And flintstones rise and break the battle ’ray,

Then think on him that doth not now dissemble,

For that shall be the hapless dreadful day,

Yet in the end thy foot thou shalt advance

As far in England as thy foe in France.’

KING OF FRANCE

By this it seems we shall be fortunate.

For, as it is impossible that stones

Should ever rise and break the battle ’ray,

Or airy fowl make men in arms to quake,

So is it like we shall not be subdued.

Or, say this might be true: yet in the end,

Since he doth promise we shall drive him hence

And scourge their country as they have done ours,

By this revenge that loss will seem the less.

But all are frivolous fancies, toys and dreams.

Once we are sure we have ensnared the son,

Catch we the father after how we can.

Exeunt





Sc. 12 Enter Edward Prince of Wales, Lord Audley and others



PRINCE OF WALES

Audley, the arms of death embrace us round

And comfort have we none, save that to die

We pay sour earnest for a sweeter life.

At Crécy field our clouds of warlike smoke

Choked up those French mouths and dissevered them,

But now their multitudes of millions hide,

Masking, as ’twere, the beauteous burning sun,

Leaving no hope to us but sullen dark

And eyeless terror of all-ending night.

AUDLEY

This sudden, mighty and expedient head

That they have made, fair Prince, is wonderful.

Before us, in the valley, lies the King,

Vantaged with all that heaven and earth can yield,

His party stronger battled than our whole.

His son, the braving Duke of Normandy,

Hath trimmed the mountain on our right hand up

In shining plate, that now the aspiring hill

Shows like a silver quarry, or an orb,

Aloft the which the banners, bannerets

And new-replenished pennants cuff the air

And beat the winds that, for their gaudiness,

Struggles to kiss them. On our left hand lies

Philippe, the younger issue of the King,

Coating the other hill in such array

That all his gilded upright pikes do seem

Straight trees of gold; the pendant ensigns, leaves,

And their device of antique heraldry,

Quartered in colours seeming sundry fruits,

Makes it the orchard of the Hesperides.

Behind us too the hill doth rear his height,

For, like a half-moon opening but one way,

It rounds us in. There, at our backs, are lodged

The fatal crossbows, and the battle there

Is governed by the rough Châtillion.

Then thus it stands: the valley for our flight

The King binds in, the hills on either hand

Are proudly royalizèd by his sons,

And on the hill behind stands certain death

In pay and service with Châtillion.

PRINCE OF WALES

Death’s name is much more mighty than his deeds.

Thy parcelling this power hath made it more

Than all the world! Call it but a power.

As many sands as these, my hands, can hold

Are but my handful of so many sands,

Eas‘ly ta’en up and quickly thrown away.

But if I stand to count them, sand by sand,

The number would confound my memory,

And make a thousand millions of a task

Which, briefly, is no more in deed than one.

These quarters, squadrons and these regiments

Before, behind us, and on either hand,

Are but a power. When we name a man,

His hand, his foot, his head hath several strengths,

And, being all but one self-instanced strength,

Why, all this many, Audley, is but one,

And we can call it all but one man’s strength.

He that hath far to go tells it by miles;

If he should tell the steps it kills his heart.

The drops are infinite that make a flood,

And yet, thou know’st, we call it but a rain.

There is but one France, and one king of France:

That France hath no more kings, and that same king

Hath but the puissant legion of one king.

And we have one. Then apprehend no odds,

For one to one is fair equality.

Enter a Herald from Jean King of France





What tidings, messenger? Be plain and brief.

HERALD

The King of France, my sovereign lord and master,

Greets by me his foe, the Prince of Wales.

If thou call forth a hundred men of name—

Of lords, knights, squires and English gentlemen—

And with thyself and those, kneel at his feet,

He straight will fold his bloody colours up

And ransom shall redeem lives forfeited.

If not, this day shall drink more English blood

Than e’er was buried in our British earth.

What is thy answer to his proffered mercy?

PRINCE OF WALES

This heaven that covers France contains the mercy

That draws from me submissive orisons.

That such base breath should vanish from my lips

To urge the plea of mercy to a man,

The Lord forbid. Return and tell thy King:

My tongue is made of steel, and it shall beg

My mercy on his coward burgonet.

Tell him my colours are as red as his,

My men as bold, our English arms as strong.

Return him my defiance in his face.

HERALD I go.

Exit

Enter a Herald from the Dauphin (Prince Charles of Normandy)





PRINCE OF WALES What news with thee?

SECOND HERALD

The Duke of Normandy, my lord and master,

Pitying thy youth is so engirt with peril,

By me hath sent a nimble-jointed jennet,

As swift as ever yet thou didst bestride,

And therewithal he counsels thee to fly,

Else death himself hath sworn that thou shalt die.

PRINCE OF WALES

Back with the beast unto the beast that sent him!

Tell him I cannot sit a coward’s horse.

Bid him today bestride the jade himself,

For I will stain my horse quite o‘er with blood

And double-gild my spurs, but I will catch him.

So tell the cap’ring boy, and get thee gone.

SECOND HERALD I go.

Exit

Enter a Herald from Prince Philippe, carrying a book





THIRD HERALD

Edward of Wales, Philippe, the second son

To the most mighty Christian King of France,

Seeing thy body’s living date expired,

All full of charity and Christian love

He offers the book to the Prince





Commends this book full fairly fraught with prayers

To thy fair hand, and for thy hour of life

Entreats thee that thou meditate therein,

And arm thy soul for her long journey towards.

Thus have I done his bidding and return.

PRINCE OF WALES

Herald of Philippe, greet thy lord from me.

All good that he can send I can receive.

But think’st thou not the unadvised boy

Hath wronged himself in thus far tendering me?

Haply he cannot pray without the book;

I think him no divine extemporal.

Then render back this commonplace of prayer

To do himself good in adversity.

Besides, he knows not my sins’ quality,

And therefore knows no prayers for my avail.

Ere night his prayer may be to pray to God

To put it in my heart to hear his prayer.

So tell the courtly wanton, and be gone.

THIRD HERALD I go. Exit

PRINCE OF WALES

How confident their strength and number makes them!

Now, Audley, sound those silver wings of thine,

And let those milk-white messengers of time

Show thy time’s learning in this dangerous time.

Thyself art bruised and bit with many broils,

And stratagems fore-past with iron pens

Are texted in thine honourable face.

Thou art a married man in this distress,

But danger woos me as a blushing maid.

Teach me an answer to this perilous time.

AUDLEY

To die is all as common as to live.

The one enchased the other holds in chase.

For from the instant we begin to live,

We do pursue and hunt the time to die.

First bud we, then we blow, and after seed,

Then presently we fall, and as a shade

Follows the body, so we follow death.

If then we hunt for death why do we fear it?

If we fear it, why do we follow it?

If we do follow it, how can we shun it?

If we do fear, with fear we do but aid

The thing we fear to seize on us the sooner.

If we fear not, then no resolved proffer

Can overthrow the limit of our fate.

For whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,

As we do draw the lottery of our doom.

PRINCE OF WALES

Ah, good old man! A thousand thousand armours

These words of thine have buckled on my back.

Ah, what an idiot hast thou made of life

To seek the thing it fears, and how disgraced

Th‘imperial victory of murd’ring death,

Since all the lives his conquering arrows strike

Seek him, and he not them, to shame his glory.

I will not give a penny for a life,

Nor half a halfpenny to shun grim death,

Since for to live is but to seek to die,

And dying but beginning of new life.

Let come the hour when he that rules it will.

To live or die I hold indifferent still.

Exeunt





Sc. 13 Enter Jean King of France and the Dauphin



KING OF FRANCE

A sudden darkness hath defaced the sky,

The winds are crept into their caves for fear,

The leaves move not, the world is hushed and still,

The birds cease singing and the wand’ring brooks

Murmur no wonted greeting to their shores.

Silence attends some wonder and expecteth

That heaven should pronounce some prophecy.

Where or from whom proceeds this silence, Charles?

DAUPHIN

Our men with open mouths and staring eyes

Look on each other as they did attend

Each other’s words, and yet no creature speaks.

A tongue-tied fear hath made a midnight hour,

And speeches sleep through all the waking regions.

KING OF FRANCE

But now the pompous sun in all his pride

Looked through his golden coach upon the world,

And, on a sudden, hath he hid himself,

That now the under earth is as a grave,

Dark, deadly, silent and uncomfortable.

A clamour of ravens





Hark, what a deadly outcry do I hear!

Enter Prince Philippe





DAUPHIN

Here comes my brother Philippe—

KING OF FRANCE All dismayed.

(To Philippe) What fearful words are those thy looks presage?

PRINCE PHILIPPE A flight, a flight—

KING OF FRANCE

Coward, what flight? Thou liest. There needs no flight.

PRINCE PHILIPPE A flight—

KING OF FRANCE

Awake thy craven powers, and tell on

The substance of that very fear in deed

Which is so ghastly printed in thy face.

What is the matter?

PRINCE PHILIPPE

A flight of ugly ravens

Do croak and hover o’er our soldiers’ heads,

And keep in triangles and cornered squares,

Right as our forces are embattelèd.

With their approach there came this sudden fog

Which now hath hid the airy floor of heaven,

And made at noon a night unnatural

Upon the quaking and dismayed world.

In brief, our soldiers have let fall their arms,

And stand like metamorphosed images,

Bloodless and pale, one gazing on another.

KING OF FRANCE ⌈aside⌉

Ay, now I call to mind the prophecy—

But I must give no utterance to a fear.

(To Philippe) Return, and hearten up these yielding souls!

Tell them the ravens, seeing them in arms—

So many fair against a famished few—

Come but to dine upon their handiwork,

And prey upon the carrion that they kill.

For when we see a horse laid down to die—

Although not dead—the ravenous birds

Sit watching the departure of his life.

Even so these ravens, for the carcasses

Of those poor English that are marked to die,

Hover about, and if they cry to us

’Tis but for meat that we must kill for them.

Away, and comfort up my soldiers,

And sound the trumpets and at once dispatch

This little business of a silly fraud. Exit Prince Philippe

Another noise. Enter the Earl of Salisbury brought in by a French Captain





FRENCH CAPTAIN

Behold, my liege, this knight and forty more,

Of whom the better part are slain and fled,

With all endeavour sought to break our ranks

And make their way to the encompassed Prince.

Dispose of him as please your majesty.

KING OF FRANCE

Go, and the next bough, soldier, that thou seest,

Disgrace it with his body presently,

Fore I do hold a tree in France too good

To be the gallows of an English thief.

EARL OF SALISBURY (to the Dauphin)

My lord of Normandy, I have your pass

And warrant for my safety through this land.

DAUPHIN

Villiers procured it for thee, did he not?

EARL OF SALISBURY He did.

DAUPHIN

And it is current. Thou shalt freely pass.

KING OF FRANCE

Ay, freely to the gallows to be hanged Without denial or impediment! Away with him.

DAUPHIN

I hope your highness will not so disgrace me,

And dash the virtue of my seal at arms.

He hath my never-broken name to show,

Charàctered with this princely hand of mine.

And rather let me leave to be a prince

Than break the stable verdict of a prince.

I do beseech you, let him pass in quiet.

KING OF FRANCE

Thou and thy word lie both in my command.

What canst thou promise that I cannot break?

Which of these twain is greater infamy—

To disobey thy father or thyself?

Thy word, nor no man’s, may exceed his power,

Nor that same man doth never break his word

That keeps it to the utmost of his power.

The breach of faith dwells in the soul’s consent,

Which, if thyself without consent do break,

Thou art not charged with the breach of faith.

Go, hang him; for thy licence lies in me,

And my constraint stands the excuse for thee.

DAUPHIN

What, am I not a soldier in my word?

Then arms, adieu, and let them fight that list.

Shall I not give my girdle from my waist

But with a guardian I shall be controlled

To say I may not give my things away?

Upon my soul, had Edward Prince of Wales

Engaged his word, writ down his noble hand,

For all your knights to pass his father’s land,

The royal King, to grace his warlike son,

Would not alone safe conduct give to them,

But with all bounty feasted them and theirs.

KING OF FRANCE

Dwell’st thou on precedents? Then be it so.

(To Salisbury) Say, Englishman, of what degree thou art.

EARL OF SALISBURY

An earl in England, though a prisoner here.

And those that know me, call me Salisbury.

KING OF FRANCE

Then, Salisbury, say whither thou art bound.

EARL OF SALISBURY

To Calais, where my liege, King Edward, is.

KING OF FRANCE

To Calais, Salisbury? Then to Calais pack,

And bid thy King prepare a noble grave

To put his princely son, black Edward, in.

And as thou travell’st westward from this place,

Some two leagues hence there is a lofty hill,

Whose top seems topless, for the embracing sky

Doth hide his high head in her azure bosom,

Upon whose tall top, when thy foot attains,

Look back upon the humble vale beneath—

Humble of late, but now made proud with arms—

And thence behold the wretched Prince of Wales

Hooped with a band of iron round about.

After which sight, to Calais spur amain,

And say the Prince was smothered and not slain.

And tell thy King, this is not all his ill,

For I will greet him ere he thinks I will.

Away, be gone. The smoke but of our shot

Will choke our foes, though bullets hit them not.

Exeunt





Sc. 14 Alarum. Enter Edward Prince of Wales and the Comte d’Artois



COMTE D’ARTOIS

How fares your grace? Are you not shot, my lord?

PRINCE OF WALES

No, dear Artois, but choked with dust and smoke,

And stepped aside for breath and fresher air.

COMTE D’ARTOIS

Breathe then, and to it again!The amazed French Are quite distract with gazing on the crows, And, were our quivers full of shafts again, Your grace should see a glorious day of this. O, for more arrows, Lord—that’s our one want!

PRINCE OF WALES

Courage, Artois! A fig for feathered shafts

When feathered fowls do bandy on our side!

What need we fight and sweat and keep a coil

When railing crows outscold our adversaries?

Up, up, Artois! The ground itself is armed

With fire-containing flint. Command our bows

To hurl away their parti-coloured yew,

And to it with stones! Away, Artois, away!

My soul doth prophesy we win the day.

Exeunt





Sc. 15 Alarum. Enter Jean King of France



KING OF FRANCE

Our multitudes are in themselves confounded,

Dismayed and distraught. Swift-starting fear

Hath buzzed a cold dismay through all our army,

And every petty disadvantage prompts

The fear-possessed abject soul to fly.

Myself, whose spirit is steel to their dull lead,

What with recalling of the prophecy,

And that our native stones from English arms

Rebel against us, find myself attainted

With strong surprise of weak and yielding fear.

Enter the Dauphin





DAUPHIN

Fly, father, fly! The French do kill the French:

Some that would stand let drive at some that fly;

Our drums strike nothing but discouragement;

Our trumpets sound dishonour and retire;

The spirit of fear, that feareth naught but death,

Cowardly works confusion on itself.

Enter Prince Philippe





PRINCE PHILIPPE

Pluck out your eyes and see not this day’s shame!

An arm hath beat an army. One poor David

Hath, with a stone, foiled twenty stout Goliaths.

Some twenty naked starvelings with small flints

Hath driven back a puissant host of men

Arrayed and fenced in all accomplements.

KING OF FRANCE

Mort dieu! They quoit at us and kill us up!

No less than forty thousand wicked elders

Have forty lean slaves this day stoned to death.

DAUPHIN

O, that I were some other countryman!

This day hath set derision on the French,

And all the world will blurt and scorn at us.

KING OF FRANCE What, is there no hope left?

PRINCE PHILIPPE

No hope but death, to bury up our shame.

KING OF FRANCE

Make up once more with me: the twenti’th part Of those that live are men enough to quail The feeble handful on the adverse part.

DAUPHIN

Then charge again! If heaven be not opposed

We cannot lose the day.

KING or FRANCE

On, on, away!

Exeunt





Sc. 16 Enter Lord Audley wounded and rescued by two Squires



SQUIRE

How fares my lord?

AUDLEY

Even as a man may do

That dines at such a bloody feast as this.

SQUIRE

I hope, my lord, that is no mortal scar.

AUDLEY

No matter if it be. The count is cast,

And, in the worst, ends but a mortal man.

Good friends, convey me to the princely Edward,

That, in the crimson bravery of my blood,

I may become him with saluting him.

I’ll smile and tell him that this open scar

Doth end the harvest of his Audley’s war. Exeunt





Sc. 17 Enter Edward Prince of Wales with his prisoners: jean King of France and the Dauphin, and all with ensigns spread. Retreat sounded



PRINCE OF WALES (to the King and then the Dauphin)

Now, Jean in France, and lately Jean of France,

Thy bloody ensigns are my captive colours—

And you, high-vaunting Charles of Normandy,

That once today sent me a horse to fly,

Are now the subjects of my clemency. 5

Fie, lords, is it not a shame that English boys,

Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,

Should in the bosom of your kingdom, thus,

One against twenty, beat you up together?

KING OF FRANCE

Thy fortune, not thy force, hath conquered us.

PRINCE OF WALES

An argument that heaven aids the right.

Enter the Comte d’Artois with Prince Philippe





See, see—Artois doth bring with him along

The late good counsel-giver to my soul.

Welcome, Artois, and welcome Philippe too!

Who now, of you or I, have need to pray?

Now is the proverb verified in you—

‘Too bright a morning breeds a louring day’.

Sound trumpets. Enter Lord Audley ⌈supported by⌉ the two Squires





But say, what grim discouragement comes here?

Alas, what thousand armèd men of France

Have writ that note of death in Audley’s face?

(To Audley) Speak thou, that woo‘st death with thy

careless smile,

And look’st so merrily upon thy grave

As if thou wert enamoured on thine end.

What hungry sword hath so bereaved thy face

And lopped a true friend from my loving soul?

AUDLEY

O, Prince, thy sweet bemoaning speech to me

Is as a mournful knell to one dead sick.

PRINCE OF WALES (embracing him)

Dear Audley, if my tongue ring out thy end

My arms shall be thy grave. What may I do

To win thy life or to revenge thy death?

If thou wilt drink the blood of captive kings,

Or that it were restorative, command

A health of king’s blood, and I’ll drink to thee.

If honour may dispense for thee with death,

The never-dying honour of this day

Share wholly, Audley, to thyself, and live.

AUDLEY

Victorious Prince—that thou art so, behold

A Caesar’s fame in kings’ captivity—

If I could hold dim death but at a bay

Till I did see my liege, thy royal father,

My soul should yield this castle of my flesh,

This mangled tribute, with all willingness,

To darkness, consummation, dust and worms.

PRINCE OF WALES

Cheerly, bold man. Thy soul is all too proud

To yield her city for one little breach.

⌈ ⌉

Should be divorced from her earthly spouse

By the soft temper of a Frenchman’s sword.

Lo, to repair thy life I give to thee

Three thousand marks a year in English land.

AUDLEY

I take thy gift to pay the debts I owe.

These two poor squires redeemed me from the French

With lusty and dear hazard of their lives.

What thou hast given me, I give to them,

And as thou lov’st me, Prince, lay thy consent

To this bequeath in my last testament.

PRINCE OF WALES

Renowned Audley, live, and have from me

This gift twice doubled to these squires and thee.

But live or die, what thou hast given away

To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay.

(To the Squires) Come, gentlemen, I’ll see my friend bestowed

Within an easy litter. Then we’ll march

Proudly toward Calais with triumphant pace,

Unto my royal father, and there bring

The tribute of my wars: fair France his king.

Exeunt





Sc. 18 Enter fat one door⌉, as Supplicants, six citizens of Calais in their shirts, barefoot, with halters about their necks. Enter fat another door⌉ King Edward speaking with Queen Philippa. Enter with them the Earl of Derby and soldiers



KING EDWARD

No more, Queen Philip—pacify yourself.

Copland, except he can excuse his fault,

Shall find displeasure written in our looks.

And now, unto this proud, resisting town.

Soldiers, assault! I will no longer stay

To be deluded by their false delays.

Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.

ALL SIX SUPPLICANTS ⌈coming forward⌉

Mercy, King Edward! Mercy, gracious lord!

KING EDWARD

Contemptuous villains, call ye now for truce?

Mine ears are stopped against your bootless cries.

Sound drums alarum, draw threat’ning swords!

FIRST SUPPLICANT

Ah, noble prince, take pity on this town,

And hear us, mighty King.

We claim the promise that your highness made—

The two days’ respite is not yet expired,

And we are come with willingness to bear

What torturing death or punishment you please,

So that the trembling multitude be saved.

KING EDWARD

My promise—well, I do confess as much.

But I require the chiefest citizens

And men of most account that should submit.

You, peradventure, are but servile grooms,

Or some felonious robbers on the sea,

Whom, apprehended, law would execute,

Albeit severity lay dead in us.

No, no—ye cannot overreach us thus.

SECOND SUPPLICANT

The sun, dread lord, that in the western fall

Beholds us now low-brought through misery,

Did, in the orient purple of the morn,

Salute our coming forth when we were known

⌉

Or may our portion be with damned fiends.

KING EDWARD

If it be so, then let our covenant stand.

We take possession of the town in peace,

But for yourselves, look you for no remorse.

But, as imperial justice hath decreed,

Your bodies shall be dragged about these walls,

And, after, feel the stroke of quartering steel.

This is your doom. (To the soldiers) Go, soldiers, see it

done.

QUEEN PHILIPPA A

Ah, be more mild unto these yielding men!

It is a glorious thing to stablish peace,

And kings approach the nearest unto God

By giving life and safety unto men.

As thou intendest to be king of France,

So let her people live to call thee king.

For what the sword cuts down, or fire hath spoiled,

Is held in reputation none of ours.

KING EDWARD

Although experience teach us this is true—

That peaceful quietness brings most delight

When most of all abuses are controlled—

Yet, insomuch it shall be known that we

As well can master our affections

As conquer other by the dint of sword,

Philip, prevail: we yield to thy request—

These men shall live to boast of clemency,

And, tyranny, strike terror to thyself.

SECOND SUPPLICANT

Long live your highness! Happy be your reign!

KING EDWARD (to the six Supplicants)

Go, get you hencel Return unto the town.

And if this kindness hath deserved your love,

Learn then to reverence Edward as your king.

Exeunt the six Supplicants





Now might we hear of our affairs abroad,

We would till gloomy winter were o’erspent

Dispose our men in garrison a while.

Enter Copland, with David King of Scotland as his prisoner





But who comes here?

EARL OF DERBY

Copland, my lord, and David King of Scots.

KING EDWARD

Is this the proud, presumptuous squire of the north

That would not yield his prisoner to my Queen?

COPLAND

I am, my liege, a northern squire indeed,

But neither proud nor insolent, I trust.

KING EDWARD

What moved thee, then, to be so obstinate

To contradict our royal Queen’s desire?

COPLAND

No wilful disobedience, mighty lord,

But my desert, and public law at arms.

I took the King, myself, in single fight,

And, like a soldier, would be loath to lose

The least pre-eminence that I had won.

And Copland, straight upon your highness’ charge,

Is come to France, and with a lowly mind

Doth vail the bonnet of his victory.

Receive, dread lord, the custom of my freight,

The wealthy tribute of my labouring hands,

Which should long since have been surrendered up,

Had but your gracious self been there in place.

QUEEN PHILIPPA

But, Copland, thou didst scorn the King’s command,

Neglecting our commission in his name.

COPLAND

His name I reverence, but his person more.

His name shall keep me in allegiance still,

But to his person I will bend my knee.

KING EDWARD (to the Queen)

I pray thee, Philip, let displeasure pass.

This man doth please me, and I like his words.

For what is he that will attempt great deeds

And lose the glory that ensues, the fame?

All rivers have recourse unto the sea,

And Copland’s faith, relation to his king.

(To Copland) Kneel therefore down.

He knights him





Now rise, King Edward’s knight.

And to maintain thy state, I freely give 96

Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine.

Enter the Earl of Salisbury, with a coronet





Welcome, Lord Salisbury! What news from Bretagne?

EARL OF SALISBURY

This, mighty King: the country we have won,

And Charles de Montfort, regent of that place,

Presents your highness with this coronet,

Protesting true allegiance to your grace.

KING EDWARD

We thank thee for thy service, valiant Earl.

Challenge our favour, for we owe it thee.

EARL OF SALISBURY

But now, my lord, as this is joyful news,

So must my voice be tragical again,

And I must sing of doleful accidents.

KING EDWARD

What, have our men the overthrow at Poitiers,

Or is our son beset with too much odds?

EARL OF SALISBURY

He was, my lord, and as my worthless self,

With forty other serviceable knights,

Under safe conduct of the Dauphin’s seal,

Did travel that way, finding him distressed,

A troop of lances met us on the way,

Surprised and brought us prisoners to the King,

Who, proud of this and eager of revenge,

Commanded straight to cut off all our heads.

And surely we had died but that the Duke,

More full of honour than his angry sire,

Procured our quick deliverance from thence.

But ere we went, ‘Salute your King,’ quoth he,

‘Bid him provide a funeral for his son.

Today our sword shall cut his thread of life

And, sooner than he thinks, we’ll be with him

To quittance those displeasures he hath done.’

This said, we passed, not daring to reply.

Our hearts were dead, our looks diffused and wan.

Wand‘ring, at last we climbed unto a hill

From whence, although our grief were much before,

Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes

Did thrice so much increase our heaviness.

For there, my lord, O there we did descry

Down in a valley how both armies lay.

The French had cast their trenches like a ring,

And every barricado’s open front

Was thick embossed with brazen ordinance.

Here stood a battle of ten thousand horse,

There twice as many pikes in quadrant wise,

Here crossbows and there deadly wounding darts,

And in the midst, like to a slender point

Within the compass of the horizon,

As ’twere a rising bubble in the sea,

A hazel wand amidst a wood of pines,

Or as a bear fast-chained unto a stake,

Stood famous Edward, still expecting when

Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh.

Anon, the death-procuring knell begins.

Off go the cannons that, with trembling noise,

Did shake the very mountain where they stood.

Then sound the trumpets’ clangour in the air.

The battles join, and when we could no more

Discern the difference ‘twixt the friend and foe,

So intricate the dark confusion was,

Away we turned our wat’ry eyes with sighs

As black as powder fuming into smoke.

And thus, I fear, unhappy have I told

The most untimely tale of Edward’s fall.

QUEEN PHILIPPA

Ah, me! Is this my welcome into France?

Is this the comfort that I looked to have

When I should meet with my beloved son?

Sweet Ned, I would thy mother, in the sea,

Had been prevented of this mortal grief.

KING EDWARD

Content thee, Philip. ’Tis not tears will serve

To call him back if he be taken hence.

Comfort thyself as I do, gentle Queen,

With hope of sharp, unheard-of, dire revenge!

He bids me to provide his funeral!

And so I will, but all the peers in France

Shall mourners be, and weep out bloody tears

Until their empty veins be dry and sere.

The pillars of his hearse shall be their bones;

The mould that covers him, their city ashes;

His knell, the groaning cries of dying men;

And, in the stead of tapers on his tomb,

An hundred-fifty towers shall burning blaze

While we bewail our valiant son’s decease!

Flourish within. Enter a Herald





HERALD

Rejoice, my lord! Ascend the imperial throne!

The mighty and redoubted Prince of Wales,

Great servitor to bloody Mars in arms,

The Frenchman’s terror and his country’s fame,

Triumphant rideth like a Roman peer,

And, lowly, at his stirrup, comes afoot

King Jean of France together with his son

In captive bonds, whose diadem he brings

To crown thee with, and to proclaim thee king.

KING EDWARD

Away with mourning, Philip! Wipe thine eyes!

Sound trumpets! Welcome in Plantagenet!

Enter Edward Prince of Wales with Jean King of France and Prince Philippe as his prisoners. Also enter Lord Audley ⌈in a litter borne by the two Squires⌉ and the Comte d’Artois





As things long lost when they are found again,

So doth my son rejoice his father’s heart,

For whom, even now, my soul was much perplexed.

QUEEN PHILIPPA

Be this a token to express my joy—

She kisses the Prince of Wales





For inward passions will not let me speak.

PRINCE OF WALES (to King Edward)

My gracious father, here receive thy gift,

This wreath of conquest and reward of war,

Got with as mickle peril of our lives

As e’er was thing of price before this day.

Install your highness in your proper right,

And herewithal I render to your hands

These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.

KING EDWARD (to the King of France)

So, Jean of France, I see you keep your word!

You promised to be sooner with ourself

Than we did think for, and ’tis so indeed.

But had you done at first as now you do,

How many civil towns had stood untouched

That now are turned to ragged heaps of stones?

How many people’s lives mightst thou have saved

That are untimely sunk into their graves?

KING OF FRANCE

Edward, recount not things irrevocable.

Tell me what ransom thou requir’st to have.

KING EDWARD

Thy ransom, Jean, hereafter shall be known.

But first to England thou must cross the seas

To see what entertainment it affords.

Howe’er it falls, it cannot be so bad

As ours hath been since we arrived in France.

KING OF FRANCE

Accursed man! Of this I was foretold,

But did misconstrue what the prophet told.

PRINCE OF WALES (to King Edward)

Now, father, this petition Edward makes

To thee, whose grace hath been his strongest shield:

That as thy pleasure chose me for the man

To be the instrument to show thy power,

So thou wilt grant that many princes more,

Bred and brought up within that little isle,

May still be famous for like victories.

And for my part, the bloody scars I bear,

The weary nights that I have watched in field, 5

The dangerous conflicts I have often had,

The fearful menaces were proffered me,

The heat and cold, and what else might displease,

I wish were now redoubled twentyfold,

So that hereafter ages, when they read

The painful traffic of my tender youth,

Might thereby be inflamed with such resolve

As not the territories of France alone,

But likewise Spain, Turkey and what countries else

That justly would provoke fair England’s ire,

Might at thy presence tremble and retire.

KING EDWARD

Here, English lords, we do proclaim a rest,

An intercession of our painful arms.

Sheathe up your swords, refresh your weary limbs,

Peruse your spoils, and after we have breathed

A day or two within this haven town,

God willing, then for England we’ll be shipped,

Where in a happy hour I trust we shall

Arrive: three kings, two princes, and a queen.

Exeunt





ADDITIONAL PASSAGE





In Q, the following lines, which are probably a misplaced addition, occur at the end of 8.108, between ‘foot’ and ‘Exeunt’, and fall between what may have been stints by two different authors. They may have been intended to go after either 8.93 or 8.98.

KING EDWARD

What picture’s this?

PRINCE OF WALES A pelican, my lord,

Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak

That so her nest of young ones might be fed

With drops of blood that issue from her heart.

The motto, ‘Sic et vos’—‘and so should you’.





