Measure for Measure





1.1 Enter the Duke, Escalus, and other lords DUKE Escalus.



ESCALUS My lord.

DUKE

Of government the properties to unfold

Would seem in me t’affect speech and discourse,

Since I am put to know that your own science

Exceeds in that the lists of all advice

My strength can give you. Then no more remains

But this: to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,

And let them work. The nature of our people,

Our city’s institutions and the terms

For common justice, you’re as pregnant in

As art and practice hath enriched any

That we remember.

He gives Escalus papers





There is our commission,

From which we would not have you warp.

(To a lord) Call hither,

I say bid come before us, Angelo. Exit lord

(To Escalus) What figure of us think you he will

bear?—

For you must know we have with special soul

Elected him our absence to supply,

Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,

And given his deputation all the organs

Of our own power. What think you of it?

ESCALUS

If any in Vienna be of worth

To undergo such ample grace and honour,

It is Lord Angelo.

Enter Angelo





DUKE

Look where he comes.

ANGELO

Always obedient to your grace’s will,

I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE

Angelo,

There is a kind of character in thy life

That to th‘observer doth thy history

Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings

Are not thine own so proper as to waste

Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.

Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,

Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues

Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike

As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touched

But to fine issues; nor nature never lends

The smallest scruple of her excellence

But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines

Herself the glory of a creditor,

Both thanks and use. But 1 do bend my speech

To one that can my part in him advertise.

Hold therefore, Angelo.

In our remove be thou at full ourself.

Mortality and mercy in Vienna

Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,

Though first in question, is thy secondary.

Take thy commission.

ANGELO

Now good my lord,

Let there be some more test made of my metal

Before so noble and so great a figure

Be stamped upon it.

DUKE No more evasion.

We have with leavened and prepared choice

Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.

⌈Angelo takes his commission⌉





Our haste from hence is of so quick condition

That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestioned

Matters of needful value. We shall write to you

As time and our concernings shall importune,

How it goes with us; and do look to know

What doth befall you here. So fare you well.

To th’ hopeful execution do I leave you

Of your commissions.

ANGELO

Yet give leave, my lord,

That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE My haste may not admit it;

Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do

With any scruple. Your scope is as mine own,

So to enforce or qualify the laws

As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand.

I’ll privily away. I love the people,

But do not like to stage me to their eyes.

Though it do well, I do not relish well

Their loud applause and aves vehement;

Nor do I think the man of safe discretion

That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO

The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS

Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!

DUKE I thank you. Fare you well.

Exit

ESCALUS

I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave

To have free speech with you; and it concerns me

To look into the bottom of my place.

A power I have, but of what strength and nature

I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO

’Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,

And we may soon our satisfaction have

Touching that point.

ESCALUS

I’ll wait upon your honour.

Exeunt





1.2 Enter Lucio, and two other Gentlemen



LUCIO If the Duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the King of Hungary, why then, all the dukes fall upon the King.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Hungary’s!

SECOND GENTLEMAN Amen.

LUCIO Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped one out of the table.

SECOND GENTLEMAN ‘Thou shalt not steal’?

LUCIO Ay, that he razed.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Why, ’twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal. There’s not a soldier of us all that in the thanksgiving before meat do relish the petition well that prays for peace. 16

SECOND GENTLEMAN I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO I believe thee, for I think thou never wast where grace was said.

SECOND GENTLEMAN No? A dozen times at least. 20

FIRST GENTLEMAN What, in metre?

LUCIO In any proportion, or in any language.

FIRST GENTLEMAN I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO Ay, why not? Grace is grace despite of all controversy; as for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain despite of all grace.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO I grant—as there may between the lists and the velvet. Thou art the list.

FIRST GENTLEMAN And thou the velvet. Thou art good velvet, thou’rt a three-piled piece, I warrant thee. I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled as thou art pilled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?

LUCIO I think thou dost, and indeed with most painful feeling of thy speech. I will out of thine own confession learn to begin thy health, but whilst I live forget to drink after thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN I think I have done myself wrong, have I not? 40

SECOND GENTLEMAN Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

Enter Mistress Overdone





LUCIO Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to—45

SECOND GENTLEMAN To what, I pray?

LUCIO Judge.

SECOND GENTLEMAN To three thousand dolours a year?

FIRST GENTLEMAN Ay, and more.

LUCIO A French crown more.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou art full of error—I am sound.

LUCIO Nay not, as one would say, healthy, but so sound as things that are hollow—thy bones are hollow, impiety has made a feast of thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN (to Mistress Overdone) How now, which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

MISTRESS OVERDONE Well, well! There’s one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five thousand of you all.

SECOND GENTLEMAN Who’s that, I pray thee?

MISTRESS OVERDONE Marry sir, that’s Claudio, Signor Claudio.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Claudio to prison? ’Tis not so.

MISTRESS OVERDONE Nay, but I know ’tis so. I saw him arrested, saw him carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO But after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art thou sure of this?

MISTRESS OVERDONE I am too sure of it, and it is for getting Madame Julietta with child.

LUCIO Believe me, this may be. He promised to meet me two hours since and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.

SECOND GENTLEMAN Besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose.

FIRST GENTLEMAN But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO Away; let’s go learn the truth of it.

Exeunt Lucio and Gentlemen

MISTRESS OVERDONE Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows, and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.

Enter Pompey





How now, what’s the news with you?

POMPEY You have not heard of the proclamation, have you?

MISTRESS OVERDONE What proclamation, man?

POMPEY All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

MISTRESS OVERDONE And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY They shall stand for seed. They had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.

MISTRESS OVERDONE But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?

POMPEY To the ground, mistress.

MISTRESS OVERDONE Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth. What shall become of me?

POMPEY Come, fear not you. Good counsellors lack no clients. Though you change your place, you need not change your trade. I’ll be your tapster still. Courage, there will be pity taken on you. You that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.

⌈A noise within⌉





MISTRESS OVERDONE What’s to do here, Thomas Tapster?

Let’s withdraw!

Enter the Provost, Claudio, Juliet, and officers; Lucio and the two Gentlemen





POMPEY Here comes Signor Claudio, led by the Provost to prison; and there’s Madame Juliet.

Exeunt Mistress Overdone and Pompey

CLAUDIO (to the Provost)

Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th’ world?

Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

PROVOST

I do it not in evil disposition,

But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO

Thus can the demigod Authority

Make us pay down for our offence, by weight,

The bonds of heaven. On whom it will, it will;

On whom it will not, so; yet still ’tis just.

LUCIO

Why, how now, Claudio? Whence comes this

restraint?

CLAUDIO

From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty.

As surfeit is the father of much fast,

So every scope, by the immoderate use,

Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,

Like rats that raven down their proper bane,

A thirsty evil; and when we drink, we die.

LUCIO If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my creditors. And yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What’s thy offence, Claudio?

CLAUDIO

What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO

What, is’t murder?

CLAUDIO

No.

LUCIO

Lechery?

CLAUDIO Call it so.

PROVOST Away, sir; you must go.

CLAUDIO

One word, good friend.

⌈The Provost shows assent⌉





Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO A hundred, if they’ll do you any good.

⌈Claudio and Lucio speak apart⌉





Is lechery so looked after?

CLAUDIO

Thus stands it with me. Upon a true contract,

I got possession of Julietta’s bed.

You know the lady; she is fast my wife,

Save that we do the denunciation lack

Of outward order. This we came not to

Only for propagation of a dower

Remaining in the coffer of her friends,

From whom we thought it meet to hide our love

Till time had made them for us. But it chances

The stealth of our most mutual entertainment

With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO

With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO

Unhapp’ly even so.

And the new deputy now for the Duke—

Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,

Or whether that the body public be

A horse whereon the governor doth ride,

Who, newly in the seat, that it may know

He can command, lets it straight feel the spur—

Whether the tyranny be in his place,

Or in his eminence that fills it up—

I stagger in. But this new governor

Awakes me all the enrolled penalties

Which have, like unscoured armour, hung by th’ wall

So long that fourteen zodiacs have gone round,

And none of them been worn; and, for a name,

Now puts the drowsy and neglected act

Freshly on me. ’Tis surely for a name.

LUCIO I warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the Duke, and appeal to him.

CLAUDIO

I have done so, but he’s not to be found.

I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service.

This day my sister should the cloister enter,

And there receive her approbation.

Acquaint her with the danger of my state.

Implore her in my voice that she make friends

To the strict deputy. Bid herself assay him.

I have great hope in that, for in her youth

There is a prone and speechless dialect

Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art

When she will play with reason and discourse,

And well she can persuade.

LUCIO I pray she may—as well for the encouragement of thy like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. I’ll to her.

CLAUDIO I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO Within two hours.

CLAUDIO Come, officer; away.

Exeunt ⌈Lucio and gentlemen at one door;

Claudio, Juliet, Provost, and officers at another⌉





1.3 Enter the Duke and a Friar



DUKE

No, holy father, throw away that thought.

Believe not that the dribbling dart of love

Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee

To give me secret harbour hath a purpose

More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends

Of burning youth.

FRIAR

May your grace speak of it?

DUKE

My holy sir, none better knows than you

How I have ever loved the life removed,

And held in idle price to haunt assemblies

Where youth and cost a witless bravery keeps.

I have delivered to Lord Angelo—

A man of stricture and firm abstinence—

My absolute power and place here in Vienna;

And he supposes me travelled to Poland—

For so I have strewed it in the common ear,

And so it is received. Now, pious sir,

You will demand of me why I do this.

FRIAR Gladly, my lord.

DUKE

We have strict statutes and most biting laws,

The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,

Which for this fourteen years we have let slip;

Even like an o‘ergrown lion in a cave

That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,

Having bound up the threat’ning twigs of birch

Only to stick it in their children’s sight

For terror, not to use, in time the rod

More mocked becomes than feared: so our decrees,

Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;

And Liberty plucks Justice by the nose,

The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart

Goes all decorum.

FRIAR

It rested in your grace

To unloose this tied-up Justice when you pleased,

And it in you more dreadful would have seemed

Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE

I do fear, too dreadful.

Sith ‘twas my fault to give the people scope,

’Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them

For what I bid them do—for we bid this be done

When evil deeds have their permissive pass,

And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,

I have on Angelo imposed the office,

Who may in th‘ambush of my name strike home,

And yet my nature never in the fight

T’allow in slander. And to behold his sway,

I will as ’twere a brother of your order

Visit both prince and people. Therefore, I prithee,

Supply me with the habit, and instruct me

How I may formally in person bear

Like a true friar. More reasons for this action

At our more leisure shall I render you.

Only this one: Lord Angelo is precise,

Stands at a guard with envy, scarce confesses

That his blood flows, or that his appetite

Is more to bread than stone. Hence shall we see

If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

Exeunt





1.4 Enter Isabella, and Francesca, a nun



ISABELLA

And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCESCA Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA

Yes, truly. I speak not as desiring more,

But rather wishing a more strict restraint

Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO (within)

Ho, peace be in this place!

ISABELLA ⌈to Francesca⌉

Who’s that which calls?

FRANCESCA

It is a man’s voice. Gentle Isabella.

Turn you the key, and know his business of him.

You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.

When you have vowed, you must not speak with men

But in the presence of the prioress.

Then if you speak, you must not show your face;

Or if you show your face, you must not speak.

Lucio calls within





He calls again. I pray you answer him.

⌈She stands asidel⌉





ISABELLA

Peace and prosperity! Who is’t that calls?

She opens the door.

Enter Lucio





LUCIO

Hail, virgin, if you be—as those cheek-roses

Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me

As bring me to the sight of Isabella,

A novice of this place, and the fair sister

To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA

Why her unhappy brother? Let me ask,

The rather for I now must make you know

I am that Isabella, and his sister.

LUCIO

Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.

Not to be weary with you, he’s in prison.

ISABELLA Woe me! For what?

LUCIO

For that which, if myself might be his judge,

He should receive his punishment in thanks.

He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA

Sir,

make me not your story.

LUCIO

‘Tis true. I would not—though ’tis my familiar sin

With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest

Tongue far from heart—play with all virgins so.

I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted

By your renouncement, an immortal spirit,

And to be talked with in sincerity

As with a saint.

ISABELLA

You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO

Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, ’tis thus:

Your brother and his lover have embraced.

As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time

That from the seedness the bare fallow brings

To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb

Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA

Someone with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA

Adoptedly, as schoolmaids change their names

By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO

She it is.

ISABELLA

O, let him marry her!

LUCIO

This is the point.

The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;

Bore many gentlemen—mysetf being one—

In hand and hope of action; but we do learn,

By those that know the very nerves of state,

His giving out were of an infinite distance

From his true-meant design. Upon his place,

And with full line of his authority,

Governs Lord Angelo—a man whose blood

Is very snow-broth; one who never feels

The wanton stings and motions of the sense,

But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge

With profits of the mind, study, and fast.

He, to give fear to use and liberty,

Which have for long run by the hideous law

As mice by lions, hath picked out an act

Under whose heavy sense your brother’s life

Falls into forfeit. He arrests him on it,

And follows close the rigour of the statute

To make him an example. All hope is gone,

Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer

To soften Angelo. And that’s my pith

Of business ’twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA

Doth he so seek his life?

LUCIO

Has censured him already,

And, as I hear, the Provost hath a warrant

For’s execution.

ISABELLA

Alas, what poor

Ability’s in me to do him good?

LUCIO Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA My power? Alas, I doubt.

LUCIO Our doubts are traitors,

And makes us lose the good we oft might win,

By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo;

And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,

Men give like gods, but when they weep and kneel,

All their petitions are as freely theirs

As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA

I’ll see what I can do.

LUCIO

But speedily.

ISABELLA I will about it straight,

No longer staying but to give the Mother

Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.

Commend me to my brother. Soon at night

I’ll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO

I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA

Good sir, adieu.

Exeunt ⌈Isabella and Francesca at one door,

Lucio at another door⌉





2.1 Enter Angelo, Escalus, and servants; a Justice



ANGELO

We must not make a scarecrow of the law,

Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,

And let it keep one shape till custom make it

Their perch, and not their terror.

ESCALUS

Ay, but yet

Let us be keen, and rather cut a little

Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman

Whom I would save had a most noble father.

Let but your honour know—

Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue—

That in the working of your own affections,

Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,

Or that the resolute acting of your blood

Could have attained th’effect of your own purpose—

Whether you had not sometime in your life

Erred in this point which now you censure him,

And pulled the law upon you.

ANGELO

’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,

Another thing to fall. I not deny

The jury passing on the prisoner’s life

May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two

Guiltier than him they try. What knows the law

That thieves do pass on thieves? What’s open made to

justice,

That justice seizes. ’Tis very pregnant:

The jewel that we find, we stoop and take’t

Because we see it, but what we do not see

We tread upon and never think of it.

You may not so extenuate his offence

For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,

When I that censure him do so offend,

Let mine own judgement pattern out my death,

And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

ESCALUS

Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO

Where is the Provost?

Enter Provost





PROVOST

Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO

See that Claudio

Be execute by nine tomorrow morning.

Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,

For that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage.

Exit Provost

ESCALUS

Well, heaven forgive him, and forgive us all!

Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.

Some run from brakes of vice, and answer none;

And some condemned for a fault alone.

Enter Elbow, Froth, Pompey, and officers





ELBOW Come, bring them away. If these be good people in a commonweal, that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law. Bring them away.

ANGELO

How now, sir? What’s your name? And what’s the

matter?

ELBOW If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke’s constable, and my name is Elbow. I do lean upon justice, sir; and do bring in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO Benefactors? Welll What benefactors are they? Are they not malefactors?

ELBOW If it please your honour, I know not well what they are; but precise villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS (to Angelo) This comes off well; here’s a wise officer!

ANGELO Go to, what quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why dost thou not speak, Elbow?

POMPEY He cannot, sir; he’s out at elbow.

ANGELO What are you, sir?

ELBOW He, sir? A tapster, sir, parcel bawd; one that serves a bad woman whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which I think is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS How know you that?

ELBOW My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour—

ESCALUS How, thy wife?

ELBOW Ay, sir, whom I thank heaven is an honest woman—

ESCALUS Dost thou detest her therefor?

ELBOW I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a bawd’s house, it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.

ESCALUS How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW Marry, sir, by my wife, who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.

ESCALUS By the woman’s means?

ELBOW Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone’s means. But as she spit in his face, so she defied him.

POMPEY (to Escalus) Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man, prove it.

ESCALUS (to Angelo) Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY Sir, she came in great with child, and longing-saving your honour’s reverence—for stewed prunes. Sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit dish—a dish of some threepence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good dishes.

ESCALUS Go to, go to, no matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the right. But to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said, Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could not give you threepence again.

FROTH No, indeed.

POMPEY Very well. You being, then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes—

FROTH Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY Why, very well.—I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you—

FROTH All this is true. no

POMPEY Why, very well then—

ESCALUS Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose. What was done to Elbow’s wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

POMPEY Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour’s leave. And I beseech you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of fourscore pound a year, whose father died at Hallowmas—was’t not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?

FROTH All Hallow Eve.

POMPEY Why, very well. I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir—’twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?

FROTH I have so, because it is an open room, and good for winter.

POMPEY Why, very well then. I hope here be truths.

ANGELO

This will last out a night in Russia,

When nights are longest there. (To Escalus) I’ll take

my leave,

And leave you to the hearing of the cause,

Hoping you’ll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS

I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.

Exit Angelo

Now, sir, come on, what was done to Elbow’s wife,

once more?

POMPEY Once, sir? There was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman’s face. Good Master Froth, look upon his honour. ’Tis for a good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?

ESCALUS Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS Well, I do so.

POMPEY Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS Why, no.

POMPEY I’ll be supposed upon a book his face is the worst thing about him. Good, then—if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the constable’s wife any harm? I would know that of your honour.

ESCALUS He’s in the right, constable; what say you to it?

ELBOW First, an it like you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY (to Escalus) By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us all.

ELBOW Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet. The time is yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS Which is the wiser here, justice or iniquity? (To Elbow) Is this true?

ELBOW (to Pompey) O thou caitiff, O thou varlet, O thou wicked Hanniball I respected with her before I was married to her? (To Escalus) If ever I was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor Duke’s officer. (To Pompey) Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or I’ll have mine action of battery on thee.

ESCALUS If he took you a box o’th’ ear you might have your action of slander too.

ELBOW Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is’t your worship’s pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are.

ELBOW Marry, I thank your worship for it.—Thou seest, thou wicked varlet now, what’s come upon thee. Thou art to continue now, thou varlet, thou art to continue.

ESCALUS (to Froth) Where were you born, friend?

FROTH Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH Yes, an’t please you, sir.

ESCALUS So. (To Pompey) What trade are you of, sir?

POMPEY A tapster, a poor widow’s tapster.

ESCALUS Your mistress’s name?

POMPEY Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY Nine, sir—Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS Nine?—Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with tapsters. They will draw you, Master Froth, and you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.

FROTH I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never come into any room in a tap-house but I am drawn in.

ESCALUS Well, no more of it, Master Froth. Farewell.

Exit Froth

Come you hither to me, Master Tapster. What’s your

name, Master Tapster?

POMPEY Pompey.

ESCALUS What else?

POMPEY Bum, sir.

ESCALUS Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that, in the beastliest sense, you are Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not? Come, tell me true; it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS How would you live, Pompey? By being a bawd? What do you think of the trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in Vienna.

POMPEY Does your worship mean to geld and spay all the youth of the city?

ESCALUS No, Pompey.

POMPEY Truly, sir, in my poor opinion they will to’t then. If your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

ESCALUS There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell you. It is but heading and hanging.

POMPEY If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together, you’ll be glad to give out a commission for more heads. If this law hold in Vienna ten year, I’ll rent the fairest house in it after threepence a bay. If you live to see this come to pass, say Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS Thank you, good Pompey; and in requital of your prophecy, hark you. I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do. If I do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipped. So for this time, Pompey, fare you well.

POMPEY I thank your worship for your good counsel; ⌈aside⌉ but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine. Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade. The valiant heart’s not whipped out of his trade. Exit

ESCALUS Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master Constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time. You say seven years together?

ELBOW And a half, sir.

ESCALUS Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you wrong to put you so oft upon’t. Are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters. As they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them. I do it for some piece of money, and go through with all.

ESCALUS Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW To your worship’s house, sir?

ESCALUS To my house. Fare you well.

Exit Elbow with officers

What’s o’clock, think you?

JUSTICE Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS I pray you home to dinner with me.

JUSTICE I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS

It grieves me for the death of Claudio,

But there’s no remedy.

JUSTICE Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS It is but needful.

Mercy is not itself that oft looks so.

Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.

But yet, poor Claudio! There is no remedy.

Come, sir.

Exeunt





2.2 Enter the Provost and a Servant



SERVANT

He’s hearing of a cause; he will come straight.

I’ll tell him of you.

PROVOST

Pray you do.

Exit Servant

I’ll know

His pleasure; maybe he will relent. Alas,

He hath but as offended in a dream.

All sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he

To die for’t!

Enter Angelo





ANGELO Now, what’s the matter, Provost?

PROVOST

Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO

Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?

Why dost thou ask again?

PROVOST

Lest I might be too rash.

Under your good correction, I have seen

When after execution judgement hath

Repented o’er his doom.

ANGELO

Go to; let that be mine.

Do you your office, or give up your place,

And you shall well be spared.

PROVOST

I crave your honour’s pardon.

What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?

She’s very near her hour.

ANGELO Dispose of her

To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

Enter Servant





SERVANT

Here is the sister of the man condemned Desires access to you.

ANGELO

Hath he a sister?

PROVOST

Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,

And to be shortly of a sisterhood,

If not already.

ANGELO

Well, let her be admitted.

Exit Servant

See you the fornicatress be removed.

Let her have needful but not lavish means.

There shall be order for’t.

Enter Lucio and Isabella





PROVOST God save your honour.

ANGELO

Stay a little while. (To Isabella) You’re welcome.

What’s your will?

ISABELLA

I am a woeful suitor to your honour.

Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO Well, what’s your suit?

ISABELLA

There is a vice that most I do abhor,

And most desire should meet the blow of justice,

For which I would not plead, but that I must;

For which I must not plead, but that I am

At war ’twixt will and will not.

ANGELO

Well, the matter?

ISABELLA

I have a brother is condemned to die.

I do beseech you, let it be his fault,

And not my brother.

PROVOST (aside)

Heaven give thee moving graces!

ANGELO

Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?

Why, every fault’s condemned ere it be done.

Mine were the very cipher of a function,

To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,

And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA

O just but severe law!

I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella)

Give’t not o’er so. To him again; entreat him.

Kneel down before him; hang upon his gown.

You are too cold. If you should need a pin,

You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.

To him, I say!

ISABELLA (to Angelo) Must he needs die?

ANGELO Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA

Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,

And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO

I will not do’t.

ISABELLA

But can you if you would?

ANGELO

Look what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA

But might you do’t, and do the world no wrong,

If so your heart were touched with that remorse

As mine is to him?

ANGELO He’s sentenced; ’tis too late.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) You are too cold.

ISABELLA

Too late? Why, no; I that do speak a word

May call it again. Well, believe this,

No ceremony that to great ones ’longs,

Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword,

The marshal’s truncheon, nor the judge’s robe,

Become them with one half so good a grace

As mercy does.

If he had been as you and you as he,

You would have slipped like him, but he, like you,

Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO

Pray you be gone.

ISABELLA

I would to heaven I had your potency,

And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?

No; I would tell what ’twere to be a judge,

And what a prisoner.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) Ay, touch him; there’s the vein.

ANGELO

Your brother is a forfeit of the law,

And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA

Alas, alas!

Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once,

And He that might the vantage best have took

Found out the remedy. How would you be

If He which is the top of judgement should

But judge you as you are? O, think on that,

And mercy then will breathe within your lips,

Like man new made.

ANGELO

Be you content, fair maid.

It is the law, not I, condemn your brother.

Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,

It should be thus with him. He must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA

Tomorrow? O, that’s sudden! Spare him, spare him!

He’s not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens

We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven

With less respect than we do minister

To our gross selves? Good good my lord, bethink you:

Who is it that hath died for this offence?

There’s many have committed it.

LUCIO (aside)

Ay, well said.

ANGELO

The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.

Those many had not dared to do that evil

If the first that did th‘edict infringe

Had answered for his deed. Now ’tis awake,

Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,

Looks in a glass that shows what future evils,

Either raw, or by remissness new conceived

And so in progress to be hatched and born,

Are now to have no successive degrees,

But ere they live, to end.

ISABELLA

Yet show some pity.

ANGELO

I show it most of all when I show justice,

For then I pity those I do not know

Which a dismissed offence would after gall,

And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,

Lives not to act another. Be satisfied.

Your brother dies tomorrow. Be content.

ISABELLA

So you must be the first that gives this sentence,

And he that suffers. O, it is excellent

To have a giant’s strength, but it is tyrannous

To use it like a giant.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) That’s well said.

ISABELLA Could great men thunder

As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,

For every pelting petty officer

Would use his heaven for thunder, nothing but

thunder.

Merciful heaven,

Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt

Split’st the unwedgeable and gnarlèd oak

Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,

Dressed in a little brief authority,

Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,

His glassy essence, like an angry ape

Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven

As makes the angels weep, who, with our spleens,

Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella)

O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent.

He’s coming; I perceive’t.

PROVOST (aside)

Pray heaven she win him!

ISABELLA

We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.

Great men may jest with saints; ’tis wit in them,

But in the less, foul profanation.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) Thou’rt i’th’ right, girl. More o’

that.

ISABELLA

That in the captain’s but a choleric word,

Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) Art advised o’ that? More on’t.

ANGELO

Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA

Because authority, though it err like others,

Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself

That skins the vice o’th’ top. Go to your bosom;

Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know

That’s like my brother’s fault. If it confess

A natural guiltiness, such as is his,

Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue

Against my brother’s life.

ANGELO (aside)

She speaks, and ’tis such sense

That my sense breeds with it. (To Isabella) Fare you

well.

ISABELLA Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO

I will bethink me. Come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA

Hark how I’ll bribe you; good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO How, bribe me?

ISABELLA

Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) You had marred all else.

ISABELLA

Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,

Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor

As fancy values them; but with true prayers,

That shall be up at heaven and enter there

Ere sunrise, prayers from preserved souls,

From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate

To nothing temporal.

ANGELO Well, come to me tomorrow

LUCIO (aside to Isabella) Go to; ’tis well; away.

ISABELLA Heaven keep your honour safe.

ANGELO (aside) Amen;

For I am that way going to temptation,

Where prayer is crossed.

ISABELLA

At what hour tomorrow

Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO

At any time fore noon.

ISABELLA

God save your honour.

ANGELO (aside)

From thee; even from thy virtue. Exeunt Isabella, Lucio, and Provost

What’s this? What’s this? Is this her fault or mine?

The tempter or the tempted, who sins most, ha?

Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I

That, lying by the violet in the sun,

Do, as the carrion does, not as the flower,

Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be

That modesty may more betray our sense

Than woman’s lightness? Having waste ground enough,

Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,

And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!

What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?

Dost thou desire her foully for those things

That make her good? O, let her brother live!

Thieves for their robbery have authority,

When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,

That I desire to hear her speak again,

And feast upon her eyes? What is’t I dream on?

O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,

With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous

Is that temptation that doth goad us on

To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet,

With all her double vigour—art and nature—

Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid

Subdues me quite. Ever till now

When men were fond, I smiled, and wondered how.

Exit





2.3 Enter ⌈ at one door⌉ the Duke, disguised as a friar, and ⌈ at another door⌉ the Provost



DUKE

Hail to you, Provost!—so I think you are.

PROVOST

I am the Provost. What’s your will, good friar?

DUKE

Bound by my charity and my blest order,

I come to visit the afflicted spirits

Here in the prison. Do me the common right

To let me see them, and to make me know

The nature of their crimes, that I may minister

To them accordingly.

PROVOST

I would do more than that, if more were needful.

Enter Juliet





Look, here comes one, a gentlewoman of mine,

Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,

Hath blistered her report. She is with child,

And he that got it, sentenced—a young man

More fit to do another such offence

Than die for this.

DUKE When must he die?

PROVOST As I do think, tomorrow.

(To Juliet) I have provided for you. Stay a while,

And you shall be conducted.

DUKE

Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET

I do, and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE

I’ll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,

And try your penitence if it be sound

Or hollowly put on.

JULIET I’ll gladly learn.

DUKE Love you the man that wronged you?

JULIET

Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.

DUKE

So then it seems your most offenceful act

Was mutually committed?

JULIET

Mutually.

DUKE

Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET

I do confess it and repent it, father.

DUKE

’Tis meet so, daughter. But lest you do repent

As that the sin hath brought you to this shame—

Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,

Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,

But as we stand in fear—

JULIET

I do repent me as it is an evil,

And take the shame with joy.

DUKE

There rest.

Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,

And I am going with instruction to him.

Grace go with you. Benedicite! Exit

JULIET

Must die tomorrow? O injurious law,

That respites me a life whose very comfort

Is still a dying horror!

PROVOST

’Tis pity of him.

Exeunt





2.4 Enter Angelo



ANGELO

When I would pray and think, I think and pray

To several subjects: heaven hath my empty words,

Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,

Anchors on Isabel; God in my mouth,

As if I did but only chew his name,

And in my heart the strong and swelling evil

Of my conception. The state whereon I studied

Is like a good thing, being often read,

Grown seared and tedious. Yea, my gravity,

Wherein—let no man hear me—I take pride,

Could I with boot change for an idle plume

Which the air beats in vain. O place, O form,

How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,

Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls

To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.

Let’s write ‘good angel’ on the devil’s horn—

’Tis now the devil’s crest.

Enter Servant

How now? Who’s there?

SERVANT One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO

Teach her the way.

Exit Servant

O heavens,





Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,

Making both it unable for itself,

And dispossessing all my other parts

Of necessary fitness?

So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons—

Come all to help him, and so stop the air

By which he should revive—and even so

The general subject to a well-wished king

Quit their own part and, in obsequious fondness,

Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love

Must needs appear offence.

Enter Isabella





How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO (aside)

That you might know it would much better please me

Than to demand what ’tis. (To Isabella) Your brother

cannot live.

ISABELLA Even so. Heaven keep your honour.

ANGELO

Yet may he live a while, and it may be

As long as you or I. Yet he must die.

ISABELLA Under your sentence?

ANGELO Yea.

ISABELLA

When, I beseech you?—that in his reprieve,

Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted

That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO

Ha, fie, these filthy vices! It were as good

To pardon him that hath from nature stolen

A man already made, as to remit

Their saucy sweetness that do coin God’s image

In stamps that are forbid. ’Tis all as easy

Falsely to take away a life true made

As to put metal in restrained moulds,

To make a false one.

ISABELLA

’Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO

Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.

Which had you rather: that the most just law

Now took your brother’s life, or, to redeem him,

Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness

As she that he hath stained?

ISABELLA

Sir, believe this.

I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO

I talk not of your soul. Our compelled sins

Stand more for number than for account.

ISABELLA

How say you?

ANGELO

Nay, I’ll not warrant that, for I can speak

Against the thing I say. Answer to this.

I now, the voice of the recorded law,

Pronounce a sentence on your brother’s life.

Might there not be a charity in sin

To save this brother’s life?

ISABELLA Please you to do’t,

I’ll take it as a peril to my soul

It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO

Pleased you to do’t at peril of your soul

Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA

That I do beg his life, if it be sin,

Heaven let me bear it. You granting of my suit,

If that be sin, I’ll make it my morn prayer

To have it added to the faults of mine,

And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO

Nay, but hear me.

Your sense pursues not mine. Either you are ignorant,

Or seem so craftily, and that’s not good.

ISABELLA

Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good

But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO

Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright

When it doth tax itself: as these black masks

Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder

Than beauty could, displayed. But mark me.

To be received plain, I’ll speak more gross.

Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA So.

ANGELO

And his offence is so, as it appears,

Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA True.

ANGELO

Admit no other way to save his life—

As I subscribe not that nor any other—

But, in the loss of question, that you his sister,

Finding yourself desired of such a person

Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,

Could fetch your brother from the manacles

Of the all-binding law, and that there were

No earthly mean to save him, but that either

You must lay down the treasures of your body

To this supposed, or else to let him suffer—

What would you do?

ISABELLA

As much for my poor brother as myself.

That is, were I under the terms of death,

Th’impression of keen whips I’d wear as rubies,

And strip myself to death as to a bed

That longing have been sick for, ere I’d yield

My body up to shame.

ANGELO Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA And ’twere the cheaper way.

Better it were a brother died at once

Than that a sister, by redeeming him,

Should die for ever.

ANGELO

Were not you then as cruel as the sentence

That you have slandered so?

ISABELLA

Ignominy in ransom and free pardon

Are of two houses; lawful mercy

Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO

You seemed of late to make the law a tyrant,

And rather proved the sliding of your brother

A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA

O pardon me, my lord. It oft falls out

To have what we would have, we speak not what we

mean.

I something do excuse the thing I hate

For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO

We are all frail.

ISABELLA Else let my brother die—

If not a federy, but only he,

Owe and succeed thy weakness.

ANGELO

Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA

Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,

Which are as easy broke as they make forms.

Women? Help, heaven! Men their creation mar

In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail,

For we are soft as our complexions are,

And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO

I think it well,

And from this testimony of your own sex,

Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger

Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.

I do arrest your words. Be that you are;

That is, a woman. If you be more, you’re none.

If you be one, as you are well expressed

By all external warrants, show it now,

By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA

I have no tongue but one. Gentle my lord,

Let me entreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA

My brother did love Juliet,

And you tell me that he shall die for it.

ANGELO

He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA

I know your virtue hath a licence in’t,

Which seems a little fouler than it is,

To pluck on others.

ANGELO

Believe me, on mine honour,

My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA

Ha, little honour to be much believed,

And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!

I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for’t.

Sign me a present pardon for my brother,

Or with an outstretched throat I’ll tell the world aloud

What man thou art.

ANGELO

Who will believe thee, Isabel?

My unsoiled name, th‘austereness of my life,

My vouch against you, and my place i’th’ state,

Will so your accusation overweigh

That you shall stifle in your own report,

And smell of calumny. I have begun,

And now I give my sensual race the rein.

Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite.

Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes

That banish what they sue for. Redeem thy brother

By yielding up thy body to my will,

Or else he must not only die the death,

But thy unkindness shall his death draw out

To ling‘ring sufferance. Answer me tomorrow,

Or by the affection that now guides me most,

I’ll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,

Say what you can, my false o’erweighs your true.

Exit



ISABELLA

To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,

Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,

That bear in them one and the selfsame tongue

Either of condemnation or approof,

Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,

Hooking both right and wrong to th’appetite,

To follow as it draws! I’ll to my brother.

Though he hath fall’n by prompture of the blood,

Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour

That had he twenty heads to tender down

On twenty bloody blocks, he’d yield them up

Before his sister should her body stoop

To such abhorred pollution.

Then Isabel live chaste, and brother die:

More than our brother is our chastity.

I’ll tell him yet of Angelo’s request,

And fit his mind to death, for his soul’s rest.

Exit





3.1 Enter the Duke, disguised as a friar, Claudio, and the Provost



DUKE

So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO

The miserable have no other medicine

But only hope.

I’ve hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE

Be absolute for death. Either death or life

Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life.

If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing

That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,

Servile to all the skyey influences

That dost this habitation where thou keep‘st

Hourly afflict. Merely thou art death’s fool,

For him thou labour’st by thy flight to shun,

And yet runn‘st toward him still. Thou art not noble,

For all th’accommodations that thou bear’t

Are nursed by baseness. Thou’rt by no means valiant,

For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork

Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,

And that thou oft provok‘st, yet grossly fear’st

Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself,

For thou exist‘st on many a thousand grains

That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,

For what thou hast not, still thou striv’st to get,

And what thou hast, forget‘st. Thou art not certain,

For thy complexion shifts to strange effects

After the moon. If thou art rich, thou’rt poor,

For like an ass whose back with ingots bows,

Thou bear’st thy heavy riches but a journey,

And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none,

For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire,

The mere effusion of thy proper loins,

Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,

For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor

age,

But as it were an after-dinner’s sleep

Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth

Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms

Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,

Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,

To make thy riches pleasant. What’s in this

That bears the name of life? Yet in this life

Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear

That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO

I humbly thank you.

To sue to live, I find I seek to die,

And seeking death, find life. Let it come on.

ISABELLA (within)

What ho! Peace here, grace, and good company!

PROVOST

Who’s there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE (to Claudio)

Dear sir, ere long I’ll visit you again.

CLAUDIO Most holy sir, I thank you.

Enter Isabella





ISABELLA

My business is a word or two with Claudio.

PROVOST

And very welcome. Look, signor, here’s your sister.

DUKE

Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST As many as you please.

The Duke and Provost draw aside





DUKE

Bring me to hear them speak where I may be

concealed.

They conceal themselves





CLAUDIO Now sister, what’s the comfort?

ISABELLA

Why, as all comforts are: most good, most good

indeed.

Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,

Intends you for his swift ambassador,

Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.

Therefore your best appointment make with speed.

Tomorrow you set on.

CLAUDIO

Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA

None but such remedy as, to save a head,

To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO But is there any?

ISABELLA Yes, brother, you may live.

There is a devilish mercy in the judge,

If you’ll implore it, that will free your life,

But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO

Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA

Ay, just, perpetual durance; a restraint,

Though all the world’s vastidity you had,

To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO

But in what nature?

ISABELLA

In such a one as you consenting to’t

Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,

And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO

Let me know the point.

ISABELLA

O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake

Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,

And six or seven winters more respect

Than a perpetual honour. Dar’st thou die?

The sense of death is most in apprehension,

And the poor beetle that we tread upon

In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great

As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO

Why give you me this shame?

Think you I can a resolution fetch

From flow’ry tenderness? If I must die,

I will encounter darkness as a bride,

And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA

There spake my brother; there my father’s grave

Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die.

Thou art too noble to conserve a life

In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,

Whose settled visage and deliberate word

Nips youth i’th’ head and follies doth enew

As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil.

His filth within being cast, he would appear

A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO

The precise Angelo?

ISABELLA

O, ‘tis the cunning livery of hell

The damnedest body to invest and cover

In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio:

If I would yield him my virginity,

Thou might’st be freed!

CLAUDIO

O heavens, it cannot be!

ISABELLA

Yes, he would give’t thee, from this rank offence,

So to offend him still. This night’s the time

That I should do what I abhor to name,

Or else thou diest tomorrow.

CLAUDIO Thou shalt not do’t.

ISABELLA O, were it but my life,

I’d throw it down for your deliverance

As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO

Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA

Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO

Yes. Has he affections in him

That thus can make him bite the law by th’ nose

When he would force it? Sure it is no sin,

Or of the deadly seven it is the least.

ISABELLA Which is the least?

CLAUDIO

If it were damnable, he being so wise,

Why would he for the momentary trick

Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA What says my brother?

CLAUDIO Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;

To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;

This sensible warm motion to become

A kneaded clod, and the dilated spirit

To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside

In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;

To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,

And blown with restless violence round about

The pendent world; or to be worse than worst

Of those that lawless and incertain thought

Imagine howling—’tis too horrible!

The weariest and most loathed worldly life

That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment

Can lay on nature is a paradise

To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO Sweet sister, let me live.

What sin you do to save a brother’s life,

Nature dispenses with the deed so far

That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA

O, you beast!

O faithless coward, O dishonest wretch,

Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?

Is’t not a kind of incest to take life

From thine own sister’s shame? What should I think?

Heaven shield my mother played my father fair,

For such a warped slip of wilderness

Ne’er issued from his blood. Take my defiance,

Die, perish! Might but my bending down

Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.

I’ll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,

No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA O fie, fie, fie!

Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade.

Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd.

’Tis best that thou diest quickly.

She parts from Claudio





CLAUDIO O hear me, Isabella.

DUKE (coming forward to Isabella) Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA What is your will?

DUKE Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some speech with you. The satisfaction I would require is likewise your own benefit.

ISABELLA I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you a while.

DUKE standing aside with Claudio Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath made an assay of her virtue, to practise his judgement with the disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her, hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true. Therefore prepare yourself to death. Do not falsify your resolution with hopes that are fallible. Tomorrow you must die. Go to your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life that I will sue to be rid of it.

DUKE Hold you there. Farewell.

⌈Claudio joins Isabella⌉





Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST (coming forward) What’s your will, father?

DUKE That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while with the maid. My mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.

PROVOST In good time. Exit with Claudio

DUKE The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good. The goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?

ISABELLA I am now going to resolve him. I had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But O, how much is the good Duke deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.

DUKE That shall not be much amiss. Yet as the matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings. To the love I have in doing good, a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit, redeem your brother from the angry law, do no stain to your own gracious person, and much please the absent Duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.

ISABELLA Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great soldier who miscarried at sea?

ISABELLA I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE She should this Angelo have married, was affianced to her oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the contract and limit of the solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman. There she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry; with both, her combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries of dishonour; in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.

ISABELLA What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world! What corruption in this life, that it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?

DUKE It is a rupture that you may easily heal, and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA Show me how, good father.

DUKE This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first affection. His unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo, answer his requiring with a plausible obedience, agree with his demands to the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience. This being granted in course, and now follows all. We shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your place. If the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense; and hear, by this is your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you think well to carry this, as you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What think you of it?

ISABELLA The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

DUKE It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to Angelo. If for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke’s; there at the moated grange resides this dejected Mariana. At that place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be quickly.

ISABELLA I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

Exit

Enter Elbow, Clown, and officers





ELBOW Nay, if there be no remedy for it but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.

DUKE O heavens, what stuff is here?

POMPEY ’Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of law, a furred gown to keep him warm—and furred with fox on lambskins too, to signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW Come your way, sir.—Btess you, good father friar.

DUKE And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made you, sir?

ELBOW Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him to be a thief, too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.

DUKE (to Pompey)

Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!

The evil that thou causest to be done,

That is thy means to live. Do thou but think

What ‘tis to cram a maw or clothe a back

From such a filthy vice. Say to thyself,

’From their abominable and beastly touches

I drink, I eat, array myself, and live’.

Canst thou believe thy living is a life,

So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY Indeed it does stink in some sort, sir. But yet, sir, I would prove—

DUKE

Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,

Thou wilt prove his.—Take him to prison, officer.

Correction and instruction must both work

Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning. The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster. If he be a whoremonger and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE

That we were all as some would seem to be-

Free from our faults, or faults from seeming free.

ELBOW His neck will come to your waist: a cord, sir.

Enter Lucio





POMPEY I spy comfort, I cry bail. Here’s a gentleman, and a friend of mine.

LUCIO How now, noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion’s images newly made woman to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting clutched? What reply, ha? What sayst thou to this tune, matter, and method? Is’t not drowned i’th’ last rain, ha? What sayst thou, trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is the way? Is it sad and few words? Or how? The trick of it?

DUKE Still thus and thus; still worse!

LUCIO How doth my dear morsel thy mistress? Procures she still, ha?

POMPEY Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub.

LUCIO Why, ’tis good, it is the right of it, it must be so. Ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd; an unshunned consequence, it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO Why ’tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell. Go; say I sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey, or how?

ELBOW For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO Well then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, ’tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity too—bawd born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you will keep the house.

POMPEY I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail?

LUCIO No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey.—Bless you, friar.

DUKE And you.

LUCIO Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW (to Pompey) Come your ways, sir, come.

POMPEY (to Lucio) You will not bail me then, sir?

LUCIO Then, Pompey, nor now.—What news abroad, friar, what news?

ELBOW (to Pompey) Come your ways, sir, come.

LUCIO Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

Exeunt Elbow, Pompey, and officers

What news, friar, of the Duke?

DUKE I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is in Rome. But where is he, think you?

DUKE I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO It was a mad, fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to’t. 361

DUKE He does well in’t.

LUCIO A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him. Something too crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred, it is well allied. But it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and woman, after this downright way of creation. Is it true, think you?

DUKE How should he be made, then?

LUCIO Some report a sea-maid spawned him, some that he was begot between two stockfishes. But it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice; that I know to be true. And he is a motion ungenerative; that’s infallible.

DUKE You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that is absent have done this? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand. He had some feeling of the sport, he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.

DUKE I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was not inclined that way.

LUCIO O sir, you are deceived.

DUKE ’Tis not possible.

LUCIO Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crochets in him. He would be drunk too, that let me inform you.

DUKE You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke, and I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.

DUKE What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO No, pardon, ’tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips. But this I can let you understand. The greater file of the subject held the Duke to be wise.

DUKE Wise? Why, no question but he was.

LUCIO A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking. The very stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a warranted need, give him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you speak unskilfully, or, if your knowledge be more, it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO Sir, I know him and I love him. 410

DUKE Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.

LUCIO Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it. I am bound to call upon you; and I pray you, your name?

LUCIO Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.

DUKE He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.

LUCIO I fear you not.

DUKE O, you hope the Duke will return no more, or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I can do you little harm; you’ll forswear this again.

LUCIO I’ll be hanged first. Thou art deceived in me, friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die tomorrow or no?

DUKE Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would the Duke we talk of were returned again; this ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency. Sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered: he would never bring them to light. Would he were returned. Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing. Farewell, good friar. I prithee pray for me. The Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He’s not past it yet, and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so. Farewell. Exit

DUKE

No might nor greatness in mortality

Can censure scape; back-wounding calumny

The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong

Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?

Enter Escalus, the Provost, and Mistress Overdone





But who comes here?

ESCALUS (to the Provost) Go, away with her to prison.

MISTRESS OVERDONE Good my lord, be good to me. Your honour is accounted a merciful man, good my lord.

ESCALUS Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.

PROVOST A bawd of eleven years’ continuance, may it please your honour.

MISTRESS OVERDONE My lord, this is one Lucio’s information against me. Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke’s time; he promised her marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old come Philip and Jacob. I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me.

ESCALUS That fellow is a fellow of much licence. Let him be called before us. Away with her to prison. Go to, no more words. Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered; Claudio must die tomorrow. Let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.

PROVOST So please you, this friar hath been with him and advised him for th’entertainment of death. Exeunt Provost and Mistress Overdone

ESCALUS Good even, good father.

DUKE Bliss and goodness on you.

ESCALUS Of whence are you?

DUKE

Not of this country, though my chance is now

To use it for my time. I am a brother

Of gracious order, late come from the See

In special business from his Holiness.

ESCALUS What news abroad i’th’ world?

DUKE None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request, and it is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is virtuous to be inconstant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure, but security enough to make fellowships accursed. Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every day’s news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?

ESCALUS One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.

DUKE What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at anything which professed to make him rejoice; a gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, and let me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared. I am made to understand that you have lent him visitation.

DUKE He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice. Yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving promises of life, which I, by my good leisure, have discredited to him; and now is he resolved to die.

ESCALUS You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty, but my brother-justice have I found so severe that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.

DUKE If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.

ESCALUS I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE Peace be with you. Exit Escalus

He who the sword of heaven will bear

Should be as holy as severe,

Pattern in himself to know,

Grace to stand, and virtue go,

More nor less to others paying

Than by self-offences weighing.

Shame to him whose cruel striking

Kills for faults of his own liking!

Twice treble shame on Angelo,

To weed my vice, and let his grow!

O, what may man within him hide,

Though angel on the outward side!

How may likeness made in crimes

Make my practice on the times

To draw with idle spiders’ strings

Most ponderous and substantial things?

Craft against vice I must apply.

With Angelo tonight shall lie

His old betrothed but despised.

So disguise shall, by th’ disguised,

Pay with falsehood false exacting,

And perform an old contracting.

Exit





4.1 Mariana ⌈discoveredwith a Boy singing



BOY

Take, O take those lips away

That so sweetly were forsworn,

And those eyes, the break of day

Lights that do mislead the morn;

But my kisses bring again, bring again,

Seals of love, though sealed in vain, sealed in vain.



Enter the Duke, disguised as a friar





MARIANA

Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away.

Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice

Hath often stilled my brawling discontent. Exit Boy

I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish io

You had not found me here so musical.

Let me excuse me, and believe me so:

My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE

’Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm

To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.

I pray you tell me, hath anybody enquired for me here

today? Much upon this time have I promised here to

meet.

MARIANA You have not been enquired after; I have sat here all day.

Enter Isabella





DUKE I do constantly believe you; the time is come even now. I shall crave your forbearance a little. Maybe I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.

MARIANA I am always bound to you.

Exit

DUKE Very well met, and welcome.

What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA

He hath a garden circummured with brick,

Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;

And to that vineyard is a planked gate,

That makes his opening with this bigger key.

This other doth command a little door

Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.

There have I made my promise

Upon the heavy middle of the night

To call upon him.

DUKE

But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA

I have ta‘en a due and wary note upon’t.

With whispering and most guilty diligence,

In action all of precept, he did show me

The way twice o’er.

DUKE

Are there no other tokens

Between you ’greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA

No, none, but only a repair i’th’ dark,

And that I have possessed him my most stay

Can be but brief, for I have made him know

I have a servant comes with me along

That stays upon me, whose persuasion is

I come about my brother.

DUKE ’Tis well borne up.

I have not yet made known to Mariana

A word of this.—What ho, within! Come forth!

Enter Mariana





(To Mariana) I pray you be acquainted with this maid.

She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA I do desire the like.

DUKE (to Mariana)

Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA

Good friar, I know you do, and so have found it.

DUKE

Take then this your companion by the hand,

Who hath a story ready for your ear.

I shall attend your leisure; but make haste,

The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA (to Isabella) Will’t please you walk aside?

Exeunt Mariana and Isabella

DUKE

O place and greatness, millions of false eyes

Are stuck upon thee; volumes of report

Run with their false and most contrarious quest

Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit

Make thee the father of their idle dream,

And rack thee in their fancies.

Enter Mariana and Isabella





Welcome. How agreed?

ISABELLA

She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,

If you advise it.

DUKE It is not my consent,

But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA (to Mariana) Little have you to say

When you depart from him but, soft and low,

‘Remember now my brother’.

MARIANA

Fear me not.

DUKE

Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.

He is your husband on a pre-contract.

To bring you thus together ’tis no sin,

Sith that the justice of your title to him

Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go.

Our corn’s to reap, for yet our tilth’s to sow.

Exeunt





4.2 Enter the Provost and Pompey



PROVOST Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man’s head?

POMPEY If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a married man, he’s his wife’s head, and I can never cut off a woman’s head.

PROVOST Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer. Tomorrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper. If you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping; for you have been a notorious bawd.

POMPEY Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind, but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.

PROVOST What ho, Abhorson! Where’s Abhorson there? Enter Abhorson

ABHORSON Do you call, sir?

PROVOST Sirrah, here’s a fellow will help you tomorrow in your execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present, and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON A bawd, sir? Fie upon him, he will discredit our mystery.

PROVOST Go to, sir, you weigh equally; a feather will turn the scale. Exit

POMPEY Pray, sir, by your good favour—for surely, sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a hanging look—do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?

ABHORSON Ay, sir, a mystery.

POMPEY Painting, sir, I have heard say is a mystery; and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery. But what mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be hanged I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY Proof.

ABHORSON Every true man’s apparel fits your thief—

POMPEY If it be too little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough. If it be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough. So every true man’s apparel fits your thief.

Enter Provost





PROVOST Are you agreed?

POMPEY Sir, I will serve him, for I do find your hangman is a more penitent trade than your bawd—he doth oftener ask forgiveness.

PROVOST (to Abhorson) You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe tomorrow, four o’clock.

ABHORSON (to Pompey) Come on, bawd, I will instruct thee in my trade. Follow.

POMPEY I do desire to learn, sir, and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare. For truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.

PROVOST

Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.

Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey

Th’one has my pity; not a jot the other,

Being a murderer, though he were my brother.

Enter Claudio





Look, here’s the warrant, Claudio, for thy death.

’Tis now dead midnight, and by eight tomorrow

Thou must be made immortal. Where’s Barnardine?

CLAUDIO

As fast locked up in sleep as guiltless labour

When it lies starkly in the travailer’s bones.

He will not wake.

PROVOST Who can do good on him?

Well, go prepare yourself.

Knocking within





But hark, what noise?

Heaven give your spirits comfort! Exit Claudio

Knocking again





By and by!

I hope it is some pardon or reprieve

For the most gentle Claudio.

Enter the Duke, disguised as a friar

Welcome, father.

DUKE

The best and wholesom’st spirits of the night

Envelop you, good Provost! Who called here of late?

PROVOST None since the curfew rung.

DUKE Not Isabel?

PROVOST No.

DUKE They will then, ere’t be long.

PROVOST What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE There’s some in hope.

PROVOST It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE

Not so, not so; his life is paralleled

Even with the stroke and line of his great justice.

He doth with holy abstinence subdue

That in himself which he spurs on his power

To qualify in others. Were he mealed with that

Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;

But this being so, he’s just.

Knocking within





Now are they come.

⌈The Provost goes to a door⌉





This is a gentle Provost. Seldom when

The steeled jailer is the friend of men.

Knocking within





(To Provost) How now, what noise? That spirit’s

possessed with haste

That wounds th’unlisting postern with these strokes.

PROVOST

There he must stay until the officer

Arise to let him in. He is called up.

DUKE

Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,

But he must die tomorrow?

PROVOST None, sir, none.

DUKE

As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,

You shall hear more ere morning.

PROVOST Happily

You something know, yet I believe there comes

No countermand. No such example have we;

Besides, upon the very siege of justice

Lord Angelo hath to the public ear

Professed the contrary.

Enter a Messenger

This is his lordship’s man.

⌈DUKE⌉ And here comes Claudio’s pardon.

MESSENGER (giving a paper to Provost) My lord hath sent you this note, and by me this further charge: that you swerve not from the smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for, as I take it, it is almost day.

PROVOST I shall obey him.

Exit Messenger

DUKE (aside)

This is his pardon, purchased by such sin

For which the pardoner himself is in.

Hence hath offence his quick celerity,

When it is borne in high authority.

When vice makes mercy, mercy’s so extended

That for the fault’s love is th’offender friended.—

Now sir, what news?

PROVOST I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.

DUKE Pray you let’s hear.

PROVOST (reading the letter) ‘Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and in the afternoon Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio’s head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed, with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.’ What say you to this, sir?

DUKE What is that Barnardine, who is to be executed in th’afternoon?

PROVOST A Bohemian born, but here nursed up and bred; one that is a prisoner nine years old.

DUKE How came it that the absent Duke had not either delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

PROVOST His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and indeed his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE It is now apparent?

PROVOST Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to be touched?

PROVOST A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless of what’s past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.

DUKE He wants advice.

PROVOST He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the prison. Give him leave to escape hence, he would not. Drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.

DUKE More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost, honesty and constancy. If I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me. But in the boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four days’ respite, for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.

PROVOST Pray sir, in what?

DUKE In the delaying death.

PROVOST Alack, how may I do it, having the hour limited, and an express command under penalty to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio’s to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide, let this Barnardine be this morning executed, and his head borne to Angelo.

PROVOST Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE O, death’s a great disguiser, and you may add to it. Shave the head and tie the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death; you know the course is common. If anything fall to you upon this more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against it with my life.

PROVOST Pardon me, good father, it is against my oath.

DUKE Were you sworn to the Duke or to the deputy?

PROVOST To him and to his substitutes.

DUKE You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch the justice of your dealing?

PROVOST But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. (Showing a letter) Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the Duke. You know the character, I doubt not, and the signet is not strange to you?

PROVOST I know them both.

DUKE The contents of this is the return of the Duke. You shall anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not, for he this very day receives letters of strange tenor, perchance of the Duke’s death, perchance entering into some monastery; but by chance nothing of what is writ. Look, th’unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be. All difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardine’s head. I will give him a present shrift, and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you. Come away, it is almost clear dawn.

Exeunt





4.3 Enter Pompey



POMPEY I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession. One would think it were Mistress Overdone’s own house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here’s young Master Rash; he’s in for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request, for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four suits of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar. Then have we here young Dizzy, and young Master Deepvow, and Master Copperspur and Master Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young Drop-hair that killed lusty Pudding, and Master Forthright the tilter, and brave Master Shoe-tie the great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more, all great doers in our trade, and are now ‘for the Lord’s sake’. Enter Abhorson

ABHORSON Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither. 19

POMPEY Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hanged, Master Barnardine!

ABHORSON What ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE (within) A pox o’ your throats! Who makes that noise there? What are you?

POMPEY Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.

BARNARDINE Away, you rogue, away! I am sleepy.

ABHORSON Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep afterwards.

ABHORSON Go in to him and fetch him out.

POMPEY He is coming, sir, he is coming. I hear his straw rustle.

ABHORSON Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY Very ready, sir.

Enter Barnardine





BARNARDINE How now, Abhorson, what’s the news with you?

ABHORSON Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers, for, look you, the warrant’s come.

BARNARDINE You rogue, I have been drinking all night. I am not fitted for’t.

POMPEY O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day. Enter the Duke, disguised as a friar

ABHORSON (to Barnardine) Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father. Do we jest now, think you?

DUKE (to Barnardine) Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with you.

BARNARDINE Friar, not I. I have been drinking hard all night, and I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets. I will not consent to die this day, that’s certain.

DUKE

O sir, you must; and therefore, I beseech you,

Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE I swear I will not die today, for any man’s persuasion.

DUKE But hear you—

BARNARDINE Not a word. If you have anything to say to me, come to my ward, for thence will not I today.

Exit

DUKE

Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!

After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey

Enter Provost





PROVOST

Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE

A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;

And to transport him in the mind he is

Were damnable.

PROVOST

Here in the prison, father,

There died this morning of a cruel fever

One Ragusine, a most notorious pirate,

A man of Claudio’s years, his beard and head

Just of his colour. What if we do omit

This reprobate till he were well inclined,

And satisfy the deputy with the visage

Of Ragusine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE

O, ’tis an accident that heaven provides.

Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on

Prefixed by Angelo. See this be done,

And sent according to command, whiles I

Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

PROVOST

This shall be done, good father, presently.

But Barnardine must die this afternoon;

And how shall we continue Claudio,

To save me from the danger that might come

If he were known alive?

DUKE

Let this be done:

Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.

Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting

To yonder generation, you shall find

Your safety manifested.

PROVOST

I am your free dependant.

DUKE

Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.

Exit Provost

Now will I write letters to Angelo—

The Provost, he shall bear them—whose contents

Shall witness to him I am near at home,

And that by great injunctions I am bound

To enter publicly. Him I’ll desire

To meet me at the consecrated fount

A league below the city, and from thence,

By cold gradation and well-balanced form,

We shall proceed with Angelo.

Enter the Provost, with Ragusine’s head





PROVOST

Here is the head; I’ll carry it myself.

DUKE

Convenient is it. Make a swift return,

For I would commune with you of such things

That want no ear but yours.

PROVOST I’ll make all speed.

Exit

ISABELLA (within) Peace, ho, be here!

DUKE

The tongue of Isabel. She’s come to know

If yet her brother’s pardon be come hither;

But I will keep her ignorant of her good,

To make her heavenly comforts of despair

When it is least expected.

ISABELLA ⌈within⌉ Ho, by your leave!

⌈Enter Isabella⌉





DUKE

Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA

The better, given me by so holy a man.

Hath yet the deputy sent my brother’s pardon?

DUKE

He hath released him, Isabel, from the world.

His head is off and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA

Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE

It is no other.

Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.

ISABELLA

O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE

You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA (weeping)

Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!

Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!

DUKE

This nor hurts him, nor profits you a jot.

Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.

Mark what I say, which you shall find

By every syllable a faithful verity.

The Duke comes home tomorrow—nay, dry your

eyes—

One of our convent, and his confessor,

Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried

Notice to Escalus and Angelo,

Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,

There to give up their power. If you can pace your

wisdom

In that good path that I would wish it go,

And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,

Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,

And general honour.

ISABELLA

I am directed by you.

DUKE

This letter, then, to Friar Peter give.

’Tis that he sent me of the Duke’s return.

Say by this token I desire his company

At Mariana’s house tonight. Her cause and yours

I’ll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you

Before the Duke, and to the head of Angelo

Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,

I am combined by a sacred vow,

And shall be absent. (Giving the letter) Wend you with

this letter.

Command these fretting waters from your eyes

With a light heart. Trust not my holy order

If I pervert your course.

Enter Lucio



Who’s here?





LUCIO

Good even.

Friar, where’s the Provost?

DUKE

Not within, sir.

LUCIO O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red. Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set me to’t. But they say the Duke will be here tomorrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother. If the old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived. ⌈Exit Isabella⌉

DUKE Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholden to your reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do. He’s a better woodman than thou tak’st him for.

DUKE Well, you’ll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO Nay, tarry, I’ll go along with thee. I can tell thee pretty tales of the Duke.

DUKE You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true; if not true, none were enough.

LUCIO I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE Did you such a thing?

LUCIO Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it. They would else have married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO By my troth, I’ll go with thee to the lane’s end. If bawdy talk offend you, we’ll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.

Exeunt





4.4 Enter Angelo and Escalus



ESCALUS Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much like to madness. Pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted. And why meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?

ESCALUS I guess not.

ANGELO And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?

ESCALUS He shows his reason for that—to have a dispatch of complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.

ANGELO

Well, I beseech you let it be proclaimed.

Betimes i’th’ morn I’ll call you at your house.

Give notice to such men of sort and suit

As are to meet him.

ESCALUS I shall, sir. Fare you well.

ANGELO Good night.

Exit Escalus

This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant

And dull to all proceedings. A deflowered maid,

And by an eminent body that enforced

The law against it! But that her tender shame

Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,

How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,

For my authority bears off a credent bulk,

That no particular scandal once can touch

But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,

Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,

Might in the times to come have ta’en revenge

By so receiving a dishonoured life

With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived.

Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,

Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not. Exit





4.5 Enter the Duke, in his own habit, and Friar Peter



DUKE

These letters at fit time deliver me.

The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.

The matter being afoot, keep your instruction,

And hold you ever to our special drift,

Though sometimes you do blench from this to that

As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavio’s house,

And tell him where I stay. Give the like notice

To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,

And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate.

But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR It shall be speeded well.

Exit

Enter Varrius





DUKE

I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.

Come, we will walk. There’s other of our friends

Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius!

Exeunt





4.6 Enter Isabella and Mariana



ISABELLA

To speak so indirectly I am loath—

I would say the truth, but to accuse him so,

That is your part—yet I am advised to do it,

He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA

Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA

Besides, he tells me that if peradventure

He speak against me on the adverse side,

I should not think it strange, for ’tis a physic

That’s bitter to sweet end.

Enter Friar Peter





MARIANA I would Friar Peter—

ISABELLA O, peace; the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER

Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,

Where you may have such vantage on the Duke

He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets

sounded.

The generous and gravest citizens

Have hent the gates, and very near upon

The Duke is ent’ring; therefore hence, away. Exeunt





5.1 Enter ⌈at one door⌉ the Duke, Varrius, and lords, ⌈at another door⌉ Angelo, Escalus, Lucio, citizens, ⌈and officers⌉



DUKE (to Angelo)

My very worthy cousin, fairly met.

(To Escalus) Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to

see you.

ANGELO and ESCALUS

Happy return be to your royal grace.

DUKE

Many and hearty thankings to you both.

We have made enquiry of you, and we hear

Such goodness of your justice that our soul

Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,

Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO

You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE

O, your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it

To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,

When it deserves with characters of brass

A forted residence ’gainst the tooth of time

And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand,

And let the subject see, to make them know

That outward courtesies would fain proclaim

Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,

You must walk by us on our other hand,

And good supporters are you.

⌈ They walk forward. ⌉

Enter Friar Peter and Isabella





FRIAR PETER

Now is your time. Speak loud, and kneel before him.

ISABELLA (kneeling)

Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard

Upon a wronged—I would fain have said, a maid.

O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye

By throwing it on any other object,

Till you have heard me in my true complaint,

And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE

Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.

Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice.

Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA

O worthy Duke,

You bid me seek redemption of the devil.

Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak

Must either punish me, not being believed,

Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, hear!

ANGELO

My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm.

She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,

Cut off by course of justice.

ISABELLA ⌈standing⌉

By course of justice!

ANGELO

And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA

Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak.

That Angelo’s forsworn, is it not strange?

That Angelo’s a murderer, is’t not strange?

That Angelo is an adulterous thief,

An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,

Is it not strange, and strange?

DUKE

Nay, it is ten times strange!

ISABELLA

It is not truer he is Angelo

Than this is all as true as it is strange.

Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth

To th‘end of reck’ning.

DUKE

Away with her. Poor soul,

She speaks this in th’infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA

O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believ‘st

There is another comfort than this world,

That thou neglect me not with that opinion

That I am touched with madness. Make not

impossible

That which but seems unlike. ’Tis not impossible

But one, the wicked’st caitiff on the ground,

May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,

As Angelo; even so may Angelo,

In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,

Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal prince,

If he be less, he’s nothing; but he’s more,

Had I more name for badness.

DUKE

By mine honesty,

If she be mad, as I believe no other,

Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,

Such a dependency of thing on thing

As e’er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA

O gracious Duke,

Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason

For inequality; but let your reason serve

To make the truth appear where it seems hid,

And hide the false seems true.

DUKE

Many that are not mad

Have sure more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA

I am the sister of one Claudio,

Condemned upon the act of fornication

To lose his head, condemned by Angelo.

I, in probation of a sisterhood,

Was sent to by my brother, one Lucio

As then the messenger.

LUCIO

That’s I, an’t like your grace.

I came to her from Claudio, and desired her

To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo

For her poor brother’s pardon.

ISABELLA

That’s he indeed.

DUKE (to Lucio)

You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO

No, my good lord,

Nor wished to hold my peace.

DUKE

I wish you now, then. Pray you take note of it;

And when you have a business for yourself,

Pray heaven you then be perfect.

LUCIO I warrant your honour.

DUKE

The warrant’s for yourself; take heed to’t.

ISABELLA

This gentleman told somewhat of my tale—

LUCIO Right.

DUKE

It may be right, but you are i’the wrong

To speak before your time. (To Isabella) Proceed.

ISABELLA

I went

To this pernicious caitiff deputy—

DUKE

That’s somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA Pardon it;

The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE

Mended again.

The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA

In brief, to set the needless process by,

How I persuaded, how I prayed and kneeled,

How he refelled me, and how I replied—

For this was of much length—the vile conclusion

I now begin with grief and shame to utter.

He would not, but by gift of my chaste body

To his concupiscible intemperate lust,

Release my brother; and after much debatement,

My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,

And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,

His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant

For my poor brother’s head.

DUKE

This is most likely!

ISABELLA

O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE

By heaven, fond wretch, thou know‘st not what thou

speak’st,

Or else thou art suborned against his honour

In hateful practice. First, his integrity

Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason

That with such vehemency he should pursue

Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,

He would have weighed thy brother by himself,

And not have cut him off. Someone hath set you on.

Confess the truth, and say by whose advice

Thou cam’st here to complain.

ISABELLA

And is this all?

Then, O you blessed ministers above,

Keep me in patience, and with ripened time

Unfold the evil which is here wrapped up

In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe,

As I, thus wronged, hence unbelievèd go.

DUKE

I know you’d fain be gone. An officer!

To prison with her.

An officer guards Isabella





Shall we thus permit

A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall

On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.

Who knew of your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA

One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

⌈Exit, guarded⌉

DUKE

A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO

My lord, I know him. ’Tis a meddling friar;

I do not like the man. Had he been lay, my lord,

For certain words he spake against your grace

In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE

Words against me? This’ a good friar, belike!

And to set on this wretched woman here

Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

LUCIO

But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,

I saw them at the prison. A saucy friar,

A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER

Blessed be your royal grace!

I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard

Your royal ear abused. First hath this woman

Most wrongfully accused your substitute,

Who is as free from touch or soil with her

As she from one ungot.

DUKE

We did believe no less.

Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER

I know him for a man divine and holy,

Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,

As he’s reported by this gentleman;

And, on my trust, a man that never yet

Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.

LUCIO My lord, most villainously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER

Well, he in time may come to clear himself;

But at this instant he is sick, my lord,

Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,

Being come to knowledge that there was complaint

Intended ’gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither

To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know

Is true and false, and what he with his oath

And all probation will make up full clear

Whensoever he’s convented. First, for this woman:

To justify this worthy nobleman,

So vulgarly and personally accused,

Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,

Till she herself confess it.

DUKE

Good friar, let’s hear it.

⌈Exit Friar Peter⌉

Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?

O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!

Give us some seats.

⌈Seats are brought in⌉





Come, cousin Angelo,

In this I’ll be impartial; be you judge

Of your own cause.

The Duke and Angelo sit.

Enter ⌈Friar Peter, and⌉ Mariana, veiled





Is this the witness, friar?

First let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA

Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face

Until my husband bid me.

DUKE What, are you married?

MARIANA No, my lord.

DUKE Are you a maid?

MARIANA No, my lord.

DUKE A widow then?

MARIANA Neither, my lord.

DUKE Why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife!

LUCIO My lord, she may be a punk, for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.

DUKE Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause to prattle for himself.

LUCIO Well, my lord.

MARIANA

My lord, I do confess I ne’er was married,

And I confess besides, I am no maid.

I have known my husband, yet my husband

Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO He was drunk then, my lord, it can be no better.

DUKE For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too.

LUCIO Well, my lord.

DUKE

This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA Now I come to’t, my lord.

She that accuses him of fornication

In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,

And charges him, my lord, with such a time

When I’ll depose I had him in mine arms

With all th’effect of love.

ANGELO

Charges she more than me?

MARIANA

Not that I know.

DUKE

No? You say your husband.

MARIANA

Why just, my lord, and that is Angelo,

Who thinks he knows that he ne’er knew my body,

But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabel’s.

ANGELO

This is a strange abuse. Let’s see thy face.

MARIANA (unveiling)

My husband bids me; now I will unmask.

This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,

Which once thou swor’st was worth the looking on.

This is the hand which, with a vowed contract,

Was fast belocked in thine. This is the body

That took away the match from Isabel,

And did supply thee at thy garden-house

In her imagined person.

DUKE (to Angelo) Know you this woman?

LUCIO Carnally, she says.

DUKE Sirrah, no more!

LUCIO Enough, my lord.

ANGELO

My lord, I must confess I know this woman;

And five years since there was some speech of

marriage

Betwixt myself and her, which was broke off,

Partly for that her promised proportions

Came short of composition, but in chief

For that her reputation was disvalued

In levity; since which time of five years

I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,

Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA ⌈kneeling before the Duke⌉ Noble prince,

As there comes light from heaven, and words from

breath,

As there is sense in truth, and truth in virtue,

I am affianced this man’s wife, as strongly

As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,

But Tuesday night last gone, in’s garden-house,

He knew me as a wife. As this is true,

Let me in safety raise me from my knees,

Or else forever be confixèd here,

A marble monument.

ANGELO

I did but smile till now.

Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice.

My patience here is touched. I do perceive

These poor informal women are no more

But instruments of some more mightier member

That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,

To find this practice out.

DUKE (standing)

Ay, with my heart,

And punish them even to your height of pleasure.—

Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman

Compact with her that’s gone, think‘st thou thy oaths,

Though they would swear down each particular saint,

Were testimonies against his worth and credit

That’s sealed in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,

Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains

To find out this abuse, whence ’tis derived.

There is another friar that set them on.

Let him be sent for.

Escalus sits





FRIAR PETER

Would he were here, my lord, for he indeed

Hath set the women on to this complaint.

Your Provost knows the place where he abides,

And he may fetch him.

DUKE (to one or more)

Go, do it instantly.

Exit one or more

(To Angelo) And you, my noble and well-warranted

cousin,

Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,

Do with your injuries as seems you best

In any chastisement. I for a while will leave you,

But stir not you till you have well determined

Upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS

My lord, we’ll do it throughly.

Exit Duke

Signor Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar

Lodowick to be a dishonest person?

LUCIO Cucullus non facit monachum: honest in nothing but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the Duke.

ESCALUS We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, and enforce them against him. We shall find this friar a notable fellow.

LUCIO As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her. Exit one or more (To Angelo) Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question. You shall see how I’ll handle her.

LUCIO Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS Say you?

LUCIO Marry, sir, I think if you handled her privately, she would sooner confess; perchance publicly she’ll be ashamed.

ESCALUS I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO That’s the way, for women are light at midnight. Enter Isabella, guarded

ESCALUS (to Isabella) Come on, mistress, here’s a gentlewoman denies all that you have said.

Enter the Duke, disguised as a friar, hooded, and the Provost

LUCIO My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the Provost.

ESCALUS In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon you.

LUCIO Mum.

ESCALUS (to the Duke) Come, sir, did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo? They have confessed you did.

DUKE ’Tis false.

ESCALUS How! Know you where you are?

DUKE

Respect to your great place, and let the devil

Be sometime honoured fore his burning throne.

Where is the Duke? ’Tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS

The Duke’s in us, and we will hear you speak.

Look you speak justly.

DUKE

Boldly at least.

(To Isabella and Mariana) But O, poor souls,

Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,

Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?

Then is your cause gone too. The Duke’s unjust

Thus to retort your manifest appeal,

And put your trial in the villain’s mouth

Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO

This is the rascal, this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS

Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,

Is’t not enough thou hast suborned these women

To accuse this worthy man but, in foul mouth,

And in the witness of his proper ear,

To call him villain, and then to glance from him

To th’ Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?

Take him hence; to th’ rack with him. We’ll touse you

Joint by joint—but we will know his purpose.

What, ‘unjust’?

DUKE

Be not so hot. The Duke

Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he

Dare rack his own. His subject am I not,

Nor here provincial. My business in this state

Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,

Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble

Till it o’errun the stew; laws for all faults,

But faults so countenanced that the strong statutes

Stand like the forfeits in a barber’s shop,

As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS Slander to th’ state!

Away with him to prison.

ANGELO

What can you vouch against him, Signor Lucio?

Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO ’Tis he, my lord.—Come hither, goodman Bald-pate. Do you know me?

DUKE I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at the prison, in the absence of the Duke.

LUCIO O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?

DUKE Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?

DUKE You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my report. You indeed spoke so of him, and much more, much worse.

LUCIO O, thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for thy speeches?

DUKE I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.

ANGELO Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses.

ESCALUS Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with him to prison. Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison. Lay bolts enough upon him. Let him speak no more. Away with those giglets too, and with the other confederate companion.

⌈Mariana is raised to her feet, and is guarded⌉

The Provost makes to seize the Duke





DUKE Stay, sir, stay a while.

ANGELO What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO (to the Duke) Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir! Foh, sir! Why, you bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your knave’s visage, with a pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour! Will’t not off?

He pulls off the friar’s hood, and discovers the Duke.

⌈Angelo and Escalus rise⌉





DUKE

Thou art the first knave that e’er madest a duke.

First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.

(To Lucio) Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you

Must have a word anon. (To one or more) Lay hold on

him.

LUCIO This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE (to Escalus)

What you have spoke, I pardon. Sit you down.

We’ll borrow place of him.

⌈ Escalus sits ⌉





(To Angelo) Sir, by your leave.

⌈ He takes Angelo’s seat ⌉





Hast thou or word or wit or impudence

That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,

Rely upon it till my tale be heard,

And hold no longer out.

ANGELO O my dread lord,

I should be guiltier than my guiltiness

To think I can be undiscernible,

When I perceive your grace, like power divine,

Hath looked upon my passes. Then, good prince,

No longer session hold upon my shame,

But let my trial be mine own confession.

Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,

Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE

Come hither, Mariana.

(To Angelo) Say, wast thou e’er contracted to this

woman?

ANGELO I was, my lord.

DUKE

Go, take her hence and marry her instantly.

Do you the office, friar; which consummate,

Return him here again. Go with him, Provost.

Exeunt Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter, and the

Provost

ESCALUS

My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour

Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE

Come hither, Isabel.

Your friar is now your prince. As I was then

Advertising and holy to your business,

Not changing heart with habit I am still

Attorneyed at your service.

ISABELLA

O, give me pardon,

That I, your vassal, have employed and pained

Your unknown sovereignty.

DUKE

You are pardoned, Isabel.

And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.

Your brother’s death I know sits at your heart,

And you may marvel why I obscured myself,

Labouring to save his life, and would not rather

Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power

Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,

It was the swift celerity of his death,

Which I did think with slower foot came on,

That brained my purpose. But peace be with him!

That life is better life, past fearing death,

Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,

So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA

I do, my lord.

Enter Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter, and the Provost

DUKE

For this new-married man approaching here,

Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged

Your well-defended honour, you must pardon

For Mariana’s sake; but as he adjudged your

brother—

Being criminal in double violation

Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,

Thereon dependent, for your brother’s life—

The very mercy of the law cries out

Most audible, even from his proper tongue,

‘An Angelo for Claudio, death for death’.

Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;

Like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.

Then, Angelo, thy fault’s thus manifested,

Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee

vantage.

We do condemn thee to the very block

Where Claudio stooped to death, and with like haste.

Away with him.

MARIANA

O my most gracious lord,

I hope you will not mock me with a husband!

DUKE

It is your husband mocked you with a husband.

Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,

I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,

For that he knew you, might reproach your life,

And choke your good to come. For his possessions,

Although by confiscation they are ours,

We do enstate and widow you with all,

To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA

O my dear lord,

I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE

Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA

Gentle my liege—

DUKE

You do but lose your labour.—

Away with him to death. (To Lucio) Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA (kneeling)

O my good lord!—Sweet Isabel, take my part;

Lend me your knees, and all my life to come

I’ll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE

Against all sense you do importune her.

Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,

Her brother’s ghost his paved bed would break,

And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA

Isabel,

Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me.

Hold up your hands; say nothing; I’ll speak all.

They say best men are moulded out of faults,

And, for the most, become much more the better

For being a little bad. So may my husband.

O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE

He dies for Claudio’s death.

ISABELLA (kneeling) Most bounteous sir,

Look, if it please you, on this man condemned

As if my brother lived. I partly think

A due sincerity governed his deeds,

Till he did look on me. Since it is so,

Let him not die. My brother had but justice,

In that he did the thing for which he died.

For Angelo,

His act did not o’ertake his bad intent,

And must be buried but as an intent

That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects,

Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA

Merely, my lord.

DUKE

Your suit’s unprofitable. Stand up, I say.

⌈Mariana and Isabella stand⌉

I have bethought me of another fault.

Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded

At an unusual hour?

PROVOST It was commanded so.

DUKE

Had you a special warrant for the deed?

PROVOST

No, my good lord, it was by private message.

DUKE

For which I do discharge you of your office.

Give up your keys.

PROVOST

Pardon me, noble lord.

I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,

Yet did repent me after more advice;

For testimony whereof one in the prison

That should by private order else have died

I have reserved alive.

DUKE What’s he?

PROVOST His name is Barnardine.

DUKE

I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.

Go fetch him hither. Let me look upon him.

Exit Provost

ESCALUS

I am sorry one so learned and so wise

As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,

Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood

And lack of tempered judgement afterward.

ANGELO

I am sorry that such sorrow I procure,

And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart

That I crave death more willingly than mercy.

’Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

Enter Barnardine and the Provost; Claudio, muffled, and Juliet





DUKE

Which is that Barnardine?

PROVOST

This, my lord.

DUKE

There was a friar told me of this man.

(To Barnardine) Sirrah, thou art said to have a

stubborn soul

That apprehends no further than this world,

And squar‘st thy life according. Thou’rt condemned;

But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,

And pray thee take this mercy to provide

For better times to come.—Friar, advise him.

I leave him to your hand. (To Provost) What muffled

fellow’s that?

PROVOST

This is another prisoner that I saved,

Who should have died when Claudio lost his head,

As like almost to Claudio as himself.

He unmuffles Claudio

DUKE (to Isabella)

If he be like your brother, for his sake

Is he pardoned; and for your lovely sake

Give me your hand, and say you will be mine.

He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.

By this Lord Angelo perceives he’s safe.

Methinks I see a quick’ning in his eye.

Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.

Look that you love your wife, her worth worth yours.

I find an apt remission in myself;

And yet here’s one in place I cannot pardon.

(To Lucio) You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a

coward,

One all of luxury, an ass, a madman,

Wherein have I so deserved of you

That you extol me thus?

LUCIO Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would please you I might be whipped.

DUKE Whipped first, sir, and hanged after.

Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,

If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow,

As I have heard him swear himself there’s one

Whom he begot with child, let her appear,

And he shall marry her. The nuptial finished,

Let him be whipped and hanged.

LUCIO I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your highness said even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.

DUKE

Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.

Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal

Remit thy other forfeits.—Take him to prison,

And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.

DUKE Slandering a prince deserves it.

⌈Exit Lucio guarded⌉

She, Claudio, that you wronged, look you restore.

Joy to you, Mariana. Love her, Angelo.

I have confessed her, and I know her virtue.

Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness.

There’s more behind that is more gratulate.

Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy.

We shall employ thee in a worthier place.

Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home

The head of Ragusine for Claudio’s.

Th’offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,

I have a motion much imports your good,

Whereto, if you’ll a willing ear incline,

What’s mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.

(To all) So bring us to our palace, where we’ll show

What’s yet behind that’s meet you all should know.

Exeunt

ADDITIONAL PASSAGES

The text of Measure for Measure given in this edition is probably that of an adapted version made for Shakespeare’s company after his death. Adaptation seems to have affected two passages, printed below as we believe Shakespeare to have written them.



A. 1.2.0.1-116

A.2-9 (‘... by him’) are lines which the adapter (whom we believe to be Thomas Middleton) evidently intended to be replaced by 1.2.56-79 of the play as we print it. The adapter must have contributed all of 1.2.0.1-83, which in the earliest and subsequent printed texts precede the discussion between the Clown (Pompey) and the Bawd (Mistress Overdone) about Claudio’s arrest. Lucio’s entry alone at 1. 40.1 below, some eleven lines after his re-entry with the two Gentlemen and the Provost’s party in the adapted text, probably represents Shakespeare’s original intention. In his version, Juliet, present but silent in the adapted text both in 1.2 and 5.1, probably did not appear in either scene; accordingly, the words ‘and there’s Madam Juliet’ (1.2.107) must also be the reviser’s work, and do not appear below.

Enter Pompey and Mistress Overdone, ⌈meeting⌉

MISTRESS OVERDONE How now, what’s the news with you?

POMPEY Yonder man is carried to prison.

MISTRESS OVERDONE Well! What has he done?

POMPEY A woman.

MISTRESS OVERDONE But what’s his offence?

POMPEY Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

MISTRESS OVERDONE What, is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY No, but there’s a woman with maid by him: you have not heard of the proclamation, have you?

MISTRESS OVERDONE What proclamation, man?

POMPEY All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

MISTRESS OVERDONE And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY They shall stand for seed. They had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.

MISTRESS OVERDONE But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?

POMPEY To the ground, mistress.

MISTRESS OVERDONE Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth. What shall become of me?

POMPEY Come, fear not you. Good counsellors lack no clients. Though you change your place, you need not change your trade. I’ll be your tapster still. Courage, there will be pity taken on you. You that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.

⌈A noise within⌉





MISTRESS OVERDONE What’s to do here, Thomas Tapster?

Let’s withdraw!

Enter the Provost and Claudio





POMPEY Here comes Signor Claudio, led by the Provost to prison. Exeunt Mistress Overdone and Pompey

CLAUDIO

Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th’ world?

Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

PROVOST

I do it not in evil disposition,

But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO

Thus can the demigod Authority

Make us pay down for our offence, by weight,

The bonds of heaven. On whom it will, it will;

On whom it will not, so; yet still ’tis just.

⌈Enter Lucio⌉





LUCIO

Why, how now, Claudio? Whence comes this restraint?



B. 3.1.515-4.1.65

Before revision there would have been no act-break and no song; the lines immediately following the song would also have been absent. The Duke’s soliloquies ‘He who the sword of heaven will bear’ and ‘O place and greatness’ have evidently been transposed in revision; in the original, the end of ‘O place and greatness’ would have led straight on to the Duke’s meeting with Isabella and then Mariana.

ESCALUS I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE Peace be with you. Exit Escalus

O place and greatness, millions of false eyes

Are stuck upon thee; volumes of report

Run with their false and most contrarious quest

Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit

Make thee the father of their idle dream,

And rack thee in their fancies.

Enter Isabella





Very well met.

What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA

He hath a garden circummured with brick,

Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;

And to that vineyard is a planckèd gate,

That makes his opening with this bigger key.

This other doth command a little door

Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.

There have I made my promise

Upon the heavy middle of the night

To call upon him.

DUKE

But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA

I have ta‘en a due and wary note upon’t.

With whispering and most guilty diligence,

In action all of precept, he did show me

The way twice o’er.

DUKE

Are there no other tokens

Between you ’greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA

No, none, but only a repair i’th’ dark,

And that I have possessed him my most stay

Can be but brief, for I have made him know

I have a servant comes with me along

That stays upon me, whose persuasion is

I come about my brother.

DUKE

’Tis well borne up.

I have not yet made known to Mariana

A word of this.—What ho, within! Come forth!

Enter Mariana

(To Mariana) I pray you be acquainted with this maid.

She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA I do desire the like.

DUKE (to Mariana)

Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA

Good friar, I know you do, and so have found it.

DUKE

Take then this your companion by the hand,

Who hath a story ready for your ear.

I shall attend your leisure; but make haste,

The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA

Will’t please you walk aside.

⌈Exeunt Mariana and Isabella⌉

DUKE

He who the sword of heaven will bear

Should be as holy as severe,

Pattern in himself to know,

Grace to stand, and virtue go,

More nor less to others paying

Than by self-offences weighing.

Shame to him whose cruel striking

Kills for faults of his own liking!

Twice treble shame on Angelo,

To weed my vice, and let his grow!

O, what may man within him hide,

Though angel on the outward side!

How may likeness made in crimes

Make my practice on the times

To draw with idle spiders’ strings

Most ponderous and substantial things?

Craft against vice I must apply.

With Angelo tonight shall lie

His old betrothed but despised.

So disguise shall, by th’ disguised,

Pay with falsehood false exacting,

And perform an old contracting.

⌈Enter Mariana and Isabella⌉





Welcome. How agreed?

ISABELLA

She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,

If you advise it.





