A Reconstructed Text of Pericles, Prince of Tyre





Sc. 1 Enter Gower as Prologue



GOWER

To sing a song that old was sung

From ashes ancient Gower is come,

Assuming man’s infirmities

To glad your ear and please your eyes.

It hath been sung at festivals,

On ember-eves and holy-ales,

And lords and ladies in their lives

Have read it for restoratives.

The purchase is to make men glorious,

Et bonum quo antiquius eo melius.

If you, born in these latter times

When wit’s more ripe, accept my rhymes,

And that to hear an old man sing

May to your wishes pleasure bring,

I life would wish, and that I might

Waste it for you like taper-light.

This’ Antioch, then; Antiochus the Great

Built up this city for his chiefest seat,

The fairest in all Syria.

I tell you what mine authors say.

This king unto him took a fere

Who died, and left a female heir

So buxom, blithe, and full of face

As heav’n had lent her all his grace,

With whom the father liking took,

And her to incest did provoke.

Bad child, worse father, to entice his own

To evil should be done by none.

By custom what they did begin

Was with long use account’ no sin.

The beauty of this sinful dame

Made many princes thither frame

To seek her as a bedfellow,

In marriage pleasures playfellow,

Which to prevent he made a law

To keep her still, and men in awe,

That whoso asked her for his wife,

His riddle told not, lost his life.

So for her many a wight did die,

⌈A row of heads is revealed⌉





As yon grim looks do testify.

What now ensues, to th’ judgement of your eye

I give, my cause who best can justify. Exit

⌈Sennet.⌉ Enter King Antiochus, Prince Pericles, and ⌈lords and peers in their richest ornaments⌉





ANTIOCHUS

Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received

The danger of the task you undertake.

PERICLES

I have, Antiochus, and with a soul

Emboldened with the glory of her praise

Think death no hazard in this enterprise.

ANTIOCHUS Music!

Music sounds





Bring in our daughter, clothèd like a bride

Fit for th’embracements ev’n of Jove himself,

At whose conception, till Lucina reigned,

Nature this dowry gave to glad her presence:

The senate-house of planets all did sit,

In her their best perfections to knit.

Enter Antiochus’ Daughter





PERICLES

See where she comes, apparelled like the spring,

Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king

Of ev’ry virtue gives renown to men;

Her face the book of praises, where is read

Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence

Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath

Could never be her mild companion.

You gods that made me man, and sway in love,

That have inflamed desire in my breast

To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree

Or die in the adventure, be my helps,

As I am son and servant to your will,

To compass such a boundless happiness.

ANTIOCHUS Prince Pericles—

PERICLES

That would be son to great Antiochus.

ANTIOCHUS

Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,

With golden fruit, but dang’rous to be touched,

⌈He gestures towards the heads⌉





For death-like dragons here affright thee hard.

⌈He gestures towards his daughter⌉





Her heav‘n-like face enticeth thee to view

Her countless glory, which desert must gain;

And which without desert, because thine eye

Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die.

Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself

Drawn by report, advent’rous by desire,

Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblants

bloodless

That without covering save yon field of stars

Here they stand, martyrs slain in Cupid’s wars,

And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist

From going on death’s net, whom none resist.

PERICLES

Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught

My frail mortality to know itself,

And by those fearful objects to prepare

This body, like to them, to what I must;

For death remembered should be like a mirror

Who tells us life’s but breath, to trust it error.

I’ll make my will then, and, as sick men do,

Who know the world, see heav‘n, but feeling woe

Grip not at earthly joys as erst they did,

So I bequeath a happy peace to you

And all good men, as ev’ry prince should do;

My riches to the earth from whence they came,

(To the Daughter) But my unspotted fire of love to you.

(To Antiochus) Thus ready for the way of life or death,

I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.

ANTIOCHUS

Scorning advice, read the conclusion then,

⌈He angrily throws down the riddle⌉





Which read and not expounded, ’tis decreed,

As these before thee, thou thyself shalt bleed.

DAUGHTER (to Pericles)

Of all ‘sayed yet, mayst thou prove prosperous;

Of all ’sayed yet, I wish thee happiness.

PERICLES

Like a bold champion I assume the lists,

Nor ask advice of any other thought

But faithfulness and courage.

⌈He takes up and⌉ reads aloud the riddle





I am no viper, yet I feed

On mother’s flesh which did me breed.

I sought a husband, in which labour

I found that kindness in a father.

He’s father, son, and husband mild;

I mother, wife, and yet his child.

How this may be and yet in two,

As you will live resolve it you.





Sharp physic is the last. ⌈Aside⌉ But O, you powers

That gives heav’n countless eyes to view men’s acts,

Why cloud they not their sights perpetually

If this be true which makes me pale to read it?

⌈He gazes on the Daughter⌉





Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,

Were not this glorious casket stored with ill.

But I must tell you now my thoughts revolt,

For he’s no man on whom perfections wait

That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.

You’re a fair viol, and your sense the strings

Who, fingered to make man his lawful music,

Would draw heav’n down and all the gods to hearken,

But, being played upon before your time,

Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.

Good sooth, I care not for you.

ANTIOCHUS

Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life,

For that’s an article within our law

As dang’rous as the rest. Your time’s expired.

Either expound now, or receive your sentence.

PERICLES Great King,

Few love to hear the sins they love to act.

‘Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.

Who has a book of all that monarchs do,

He’s more secure to keep it shut than shown,

For vice repeated, like the wand’ring wind,

Blows dust in others’ eyes to spread itself;

And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,

The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear

To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts

Copped hills towards heav’n to tell the earth is thronged

By man’s oppression, and the poor worm doth die for’t.

Kings are earth’s gods; in vice their law’s their will,

And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?

It is enough you know, and it is fit,

What being more known grows worse, to smother it.

All love the womb that their first being bred;

Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.

ANTIOCHUS (aside)

Heav’n, that I had thy head! He’s found the meaning.

But I will gloze with him.—Young Prince of Tyre,

Though by the tenor of our strict edict,

Your exposition misinterpreting,

We might proceed to cancel of your days,

Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree

As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise.

Forty days longer we do respite you,

If by which time our secret be undone,

This mercy shows we’ll joy in such a son.

And until then your entertain shall be

As doth befit your worth and our degree.

⌈Flourish.⌉Exeunt all but Pericles





PERICLES

How courtesy would seem to cover sin

When what is done is like an hypocrite,

The which is good in nothing but in sight.

If it be true that I interpret false,

Then were it certain you were not so bad

As with foul incest to abuse your soul,

Where now you’re both a father and a son

By your uncomely claspings with your child—

Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father—

And she, an eater of her mother’s flesh,

By the defiling of her parents’ bed,

And both like serpents are, who though they feed

On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.

Antioch, farewell, for wisdom sees those men

Blush not in actions blacker than the night

Will ’schew no course to keep them from the light.

One sin, I know, another doth provoke.

Murder’s as near to lust as flame to smoke.

Poison and treason are the hands of sin,

Ay, and the targets to put off the shame.

Then, lest my life be cropped to keep you clear,

By flight I’ll shun the danger which I fear. Exit

Enter Antiochus





ANTIOCHUS

He hath found the meaning, for the which we mean

To have his head. He must not live

To trumpet forth my infamy, nor tell the world

Antiochus doth sin in such a loathèd manner,

And therefore instantly this prince must die,

For by his fall my honour must keep high.

Who attends us there?

Enter Thaliart





THALIART

Doth your highness call?

ANTIOCHUS

Thaliart, you are of our chamber, Thaliart,

And to your secrecy our mind partakes

Her private actions. For your faithfulness

We will advance you, Thaliart. Behold,

Here’s poison, and here’s gold.

We hate the Prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him.

It fits thee not to ask the reason. Why?

Because we bid it. Say, is it done?

THALIART My lord, ’tis done.

ANTIOCHUS Enough.

Enter a Messenger hastily





Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.

MESSENGER

Your majesty, Prince Pericles is fled. ⌈Exit⌉

ANTIOCHUS (to Thaliart)

As thou wilt live, fly after; like an arrow

Shot from a well-experienced archer hits

The mark his eye doth level at, so thou

Never return unless it be to say

‘Your majesty, Prince Pericles is dead.’

THALIART

If I can get him in my pistol’s length

I’ll make him sure enough. Farewell, your highness.

ANTIOCHUS

Thaliart, adieu.

⌈Exit Thaliart⌉



Till Pericles be dead





My heart can lend no succour to my head.

Exit. ⌈The heads are concealed⌉





Sc. 2 Enter Pericles, distempered, with his lords



PERICLES

Let none disturb us.

Exeunt lords

Why should this change of thoughts,

The sad companion, dull-eyed melancholy,

Be my so used a guest as not an hour

In the day’s glorious walk or peaceful night,

The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me

quiet? 5

Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun

them,

And danger, which I feared, ’s at Antioch,

Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here.

Yet neither pleasure’s art can joy my spirits,

Nor yet care’s author’s distance comfort me.

Then it is thus: the passions of the mind,

That have their first conception by misdread,

Have after-nourishment and life by care,

And what was first but fear what might be done

Grows elder now, and cares it be not done.

And so with me. The great Antiochus,

‘Gainst whom I am too little to contend,

Since he’s so great can make his will his act,

Will think me speaking though I swear to silence,

Nor boots it me to say I honour him

If he suspect I may dishonour him.

And what may make him blush in being known,

He’ll stop the course by which it might be known.

With hostile forces he’ll o’erspread the land,

And with th‘ostent of war will look so huge

Amazement shall drive courage from the state,

Our men be vanquished ere they do resist,

And subjects punished that ne’er thought offence,

Which care of them, not pity of myself,

Who am no more but as the tops of trees

Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,

Makes both my body pine and soul to languish,

And punish that before that he would punish.

Enter all the Lords, among them old Helicanus, to Pericles





FIRST LORD

Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!

SECOND LORD

And keep your mind peaceful and comfortable.

HELICANUS

Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.

(To Pericles) You do not well so to abuse yourself,

To waste your body here with pining sorrow,

Upon whose safety doth depend the lives

And the prosperity of a whole kingdom.

‘Tis ill in you to do it, and no less

ll in your council not to contradict it.

They do abuse the King that flatter him,

For flatt’ry is the bellows blows up sin;

The thing the which is flattered, but a spark,

To which that wind gives heat and stronger glowing;

Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,

Fits kings as they are men, for they may err.

When Signor Sooth here does proclaim a peace

He flatters you, makes war upon your life.

⌈He kneels⌉





Prince, pardon me, or strike me if you please.

I cannot be much lower than my knees.

PERICLES

All leave us else; but let your cares o’erlook

What shipping and what lading’s in our haven,

And then return to us. Exeunt Lords

Helicane, thou





Hast moved us. What seest thou in our looks?

HELICANUS An angry brow, dread lord.

PERICLES

If there be such a dart in princes’ frowns,

How durst thy tongue move anger to our brows?

HELICANUS

How dares the plants look up to heav’n from whence

They have their nourishment?

PERICLES

Thou knowest I have pow’r to take thy life from thee.

HELICANUS

I have ground the axe myself; do you but strike the blow.

PERICLES ⌈lifting him up⌉

Rise, prithee, rise. Sit down. Thou art no flatterer,

I thank thee for it, and the heav‘ns forbid

That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid.

Fit counsellor and servant for a prince,

Who by thy wisdom mak’st a prince thy servant,

What wouldst thou have me do?

HELICANUS

To bear with patience

Such griefs as you do lay upon yourself.

PERICLES

Thou speak‘st like a physician, Helicanus,

That ministers a potion unto me

That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.

Attend me, then. I went to Antioch,

Where, as thou know’st, against the face of death

I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty

From whence an issue I might propagate,

As children are heav‘n’s blessings: to parents,

objects;

Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.

Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,

The rest—hark in thine ear—as black as incest,

Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father

Seemed not to strike, but smooth. But thou know’st

this,

‘Tis time to fear when tyrants seems to kiss;

Which fear so grew in me I hither fled

Under the covering of careful night,

Who seemed my good protector, and being here

Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.

I knew him tyrannous, and tyrants’ fears

Decrease not, but grow faster than the years.

And should he doubt—as doubt no doubt he doth—

That I should open to the list’ning air

How many worthy princes’ bloods were shed

To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,

To lop that doubt he’ll fill this land with arms,

And make pretence of wrong that I have done him,

When all for mine—if I may call—offence

Must feel war’s blow, who spares not innocence;

Which love to all, of which thyself art one,

Who now reproved’st me for’t—

HELICANUS

Alas, sir.

PERICLES

Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,

Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts,

How I might stop this tempest ere it came,

And, finding little comfort to relieve them,

I thought it princely charity to grieve them.

HELICANUS

Well, my lord, since you have giv’n me leave to speak,

Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,

And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,

Who either by public war or private treason

Will take away your life.

Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,

Till that his rage and anger be forgot,

Or destinies do cut his thread of life.

Your rule direct to any; if to me,

Day serves not light more faithful than I’ll be.

PERICLES I do not doubt thy faith,

But should he in my absence wrong thy liberties?

HELICANUS

We’ll mingle our bloods together in the earth

From whence we had our being and our birth.

PERICLES

Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus

Intend my travel, where I’ll hear from thee,

And by whose letters I’ll dispose myself.

The care I had and have of subjects’ good

On thee I lay, whose wisdom’s strength can bear it.

I’ll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath;

Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both.

But in our orbs we’ll live so round and safe

That time of both this truth shall ne’er convince:

Thou showed’st a subject’s shine, I a true prince.

Exeunt





Sc. 3 Enter Thaliart



THALIART So this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I kill King Pericles, and if I do it and am caught I am like to be hanged abroad, but if I do it not, I am sure to be hanged at home. ‘Tis dangerous. Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow and had good discretion that, being bid to ask what he would of the King, desired he might know none of his secrets. Now do I see he had some reason for’t, for if a king bid a man be a villain, he’s bound by the indenture of his oath to be one. Hush, here comes the lords of Tyre.

Enter Helicanus and Aeschines, with other lords





HELICANUS

You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,

Further to question of your King’s departure.

His sealed commission left in trust with me

Does speak sufficiently he’s gone to travel.

THALIART (aside) How? The King gone?

HELICANUS

If further yet you will be satisfied

Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,

He would depart, I’ll give some light unto you.

Being at Antioch—

THALIART (aside)

What from Antioch?

HELICANUS

Royal Antiochus, on what cause I know not,

Took some displeasure at him—at least he judged so—

And doubting lest that he had erred or sinned,

To show his sorrow he’d correct himself;

So puts himself unto the ship-man’s toil,

With whom each minute threatens life or death.

THALIART (aside)

Well, I perceive I shall not be hanged now,

Although I would.

But since he’s gone, the King’s ears it must please

He scaped the land to perish on the seas.

I’ll present myself.—Peace to the lords of Tyre.

Lord Thaliart am I, of Antioch.

⌈HELICANUS⌉

Lord Thaliart of Antioch is welcome.

THALIART

From King Antiochus I come

With message unto princely Pericles,

But since my landing I have understood

Your lord’s betook himself to unknown travels.

Now my message must return from whence it came.

HELICANUS

We have no reason to enquire it,

Commended to our master, not to us.

Yet ere you shall depart, this we desire:

As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre. Exeunt





Sc. 4 Enter Cleon, the Governor of Tarsus, with Dionyza his wife, and others



CLEON

My Dionyza, shall we rest us here

And, by relating tales of others’ griefs,

See if ’twill teach us to forget our own?

DIONYZA

That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it,

For who digs hills because they do aspire

Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.

O my distressed lord, e’en such our griefs are;

Here they’re but felt and seen with midges’ eyes,

But like to groves, being topped they higher rise.

CLEON O Dionyza,

Who wanteth food and will not say he wants it,

Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?

Our tongues our sorrows dictate to sound deep

Our woes into the air, our eyes to weep

Till lungs fetch breath that may proclaim them louder,

That, if heav’n slumber while their creatures want,

They may awake their helps to comfort them.

I’ll then discourse our woes, felt sev’ral years,

And, wanting breath to speak, help me with tears.

DIONYZA As you think best, sir.

CLEON

This Tarsus o‘er which I have the government,

A city o’er whom plenty held full hand,

For riches strewed herself ev’n in the streets,

Whose tow‘rs bore heads so high they kissed the clouds,

And strangers ne’er beheld but wondered at,

Whose men and dames so jetted and adorned

Like one another’s glass to trim them by;

Their tables were stored full to glad the sight,

And not so much to feed on as delight.

All poverty was scorned, and pride so great

The name of help grew odious to repeat.

DIONYZA O, ’tis too true.

CLEON

But see what heav’n can do by this our change.

Those mouths who but of late earth, sea, and air

Were all too little to content and please,

Although they gave their creatures in abundance,

As houses are defiled for want of use,

They are now starved for want of exercise.

Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,

Must have inventions to delight the taste

Would now be glad of bread and beg for it.

Those mothers who to nuzzle up their babes

Thought naught too curious are ready now

To eat those little darlings whom they loved.

So sharp are hunger’s teeth that man and wife

Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life.

Here weeping stands a lord, there lies a lady dying,

Here many sink, yet those which see them fall

Have scarce strength left to give them burial.

Is not this true?

DIONYZA

Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.

CLEON

O, let those cities that of plenty’s cup

And her prosperities so largely taste

With their superfluous riots, heed these tears!

The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.

Enter a ⌈fainting⌉Lord of Tarsus ⌈slowly⌉





LORD Where’s the Lord Governor?

CLEON

Here. Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring‘st in

haste,

For comfort is too far for us t’expect.

LORD

We have descried upon our neighbouring shore

A portly sail of ships make hitherward.

CLEON I thought as much.

One sorrow never comes but brings an heir

That may succeed as his inheritor,

And so in ours. Some neighbour nation,

Taking advantage of our misery,

Hath stuffed these hollow vessels with their power

To beat us down, the which are down already,

And make a conquest of unhappy men,

Whereas no glory’s got to overcome.

LORD

That’s the least fear, for by the semblance

Of their white flags displayed they bring us peace,

And come to us as favourers, not foes.

CLEON

Thou speak‘st like him’s untutored to repeat;

Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.

But bring they what they will and what they can,

What need we fear?

Our grave’s the low’st, and we are half-way there.

Go tell their gen’ral we attend him here

To know for what he comes, and whence he comes.

LORD I go, my lord. Exit

CLEON

Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;

If wars, we are unable to resist.

Enter ⌈the Lord again conducting⌉ Pericles with attendants





PERICLES (to Cleon)

Lord Governor, for so we hear you are,

Let not our ships and number of our men

Be like a beacon fixed t’amaze your eyes.

We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,

Since entering your unshut gates have witnessed

The widowed desolation of your streets;

Nor come we to add sorrow to your hearts,

But to relieve them of their heavy load;

And these our ships, you happily may think

Are like the Trojan horse was fraught within

With bloody veins importing overthrow,

Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,

And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.

ALL OF TARSUS ⌈falling⌉on their knees and weeping⌉

The gods of Greece protect you, and we’ll pray for you!

PERICLES Arise, I pray you, rise.

We do not look for reverence but for love,

And harbourage for me, my ships and men.

CLEON

The which when any shall not gratify,

Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,

Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,

The curse of heav’n and men succeed their evils!

Till when—the which I hope shall ne’er be seen—

Your grace is welcome to our town and us.

PERICLES

Which welcome we’ll accept, feast here a while,

Until our stars that frown lend us a smile. Exeunt





Sc. 5 Enter Gower



GOWER

Here have you seen a mighty king

His child, iwis, to incest bring;

A better prince and benign lord

Prove awe-full both in deed and word.

Be quiet then, as men should be,

Till he hath passed necessity.

I’ll show you those in trouble’s reign,

Losing a mite, a mountain gain.

The good in conversation,

To whom I give my benison,

Is still at Tarsus where each man

Thinks all is writ he speken can,

And to remember what he does

His statue build to make him glorious.

But tidings to the contrary

Are brought your eyes. What need speak I?

Dumb show. Enter at one door Pericles talking with Cleon, all the train with them. Enter at another door a gentleman with a letter to Pericles. Pericles shows the letter to Cleon. Pericles gives the messenger a reward, and knights him. Exeunt with their trains Pericles at one door and Cleon at another





Good Helicane that stayed at home,

Not to eat honey like a drone

From others’ labours, for that he strive

To killen bad, keep good alive,

And to fulfil his prince’ desire

Sent word of all that haps in Tyre;

How Thaliart came full bent with sin

And hid intent to murdren him,

And that in Tarsus was not best

Longer for him to make his rest.

He deeming so put forth to seas,

Where when men been there’s seldom ease,

For now the wind begins to blow;

Thunder above and deeps below

Makes such unquiet that the ship

Should house him safe is wrecked and split,

And he, good prince, having all lost,

By waves from coast to coast is tossed.

All perishen of man, of pelf,

Ne aught escapend but himself,

Till fortune, tired with doing bad,

Threw him ashore to give him glad.

[Enter Pericles wet and half-naked]





And here he comes. What shall be next

Pardon old Gower; this ’longs the text. Exit

[Thunder and lightning]





PERICLES

Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!

Wind, rain, and thunder, remember earthly man

Is but a substance that must yield to you,

And I, as fits my nature, do obey you.

Alas, the seas hath cast me on the rocks,

Washed me from shore to shore, and left my breath

Nothing to think on but ensuing death.

Let it suffice the greatness of your powers

To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes,

And, having thrown him from your wat’ry grave,

Here to have death in peace is all he’ll crave.

He sits.Enter two poor Fishermen: one the Master, the other his man





MASTER calling What ho, Pitch!

SECOND FISHERMAN calling Ha, come and bring away the nets.

MASTER calling What, Patchbreech, I say!

Enter a Third rough Fisherman with a hood upon his head and a filthy leathern pelt upon his back, unseemly clad, and homely to behold. He brings nets to dry and repair





THIRD FISHERMAN What say you, master?

MASTER Look how thou stirrest now. Come away, or I’ll fetch th’ with a wanion.

THIRD FISHERMAN Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that were cast away before us even now.

MASTER Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what pitiful cries they made to us to help them when, well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.

THIRD FISHERMAN Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the porpoise how he bounced and tumbled? They say they’re half fish, half flesh. A plague on them, they ne’er come but I look to be washed. Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea.

MASTER Why, as men do a-land—the great ones eat up the little ones. I can compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale: a plays and tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at last devours them all at a mouthful. Such whales have I heard on o’th’ land, who never leave gaping till they swallowed the whole parish: church, steeple, bells, and all. PERICLES (aside) A pretty moral.

THIRD FISHERMAN But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have been that day in the belfry.

SECOND FISHERMAN Why, man?

THIRD FISHERMAN Because he should have swallowed me, too, and when I had been in his belly I would have kept such a jangling of the bells that he should never have left till he cast bells, steeple, church, and parish up again. But if the good King Simonides were of my mind—

PERICLES (aside) Simonides?

THIRD FISHERMAN We would purge the land of these drones that rob the bee of her honey.

PERICLES (aside)

How from the finny subject of the sea

These fishers tell th’infirmities of men,

And from their wat’ry empire recollect

All that may men approve or men detect!

Coming forward Peace be at your labour, honest

fishermen.

SECOND FISHERMAN Honest, good fellow? What’s that? If it be a day fits you, scratch’t out of the calendar, and nobody look after it.

PERICLES

May see the sea hath cast upon your coast—

SECOND FISHERMAN What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in our way!

PERICLES

A man, whom both the waters and the wind

In that vast tennis-court hath made the ball

For them to play upon, entreats you pity him.

He asks of you that never used to beg.

MASTER No, friend, cannot you beg? Here’s them in our country of Greece gets more with begging than we can do with working.

SECOND FISHERMAN Canst thou catch any fishes, then?

PERICLES I never practised it.

SECOND FISHERMAN Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here’s nothing to be got nowadays unless thou canst fish for’t.

PERICLES

What I have been, I have forgot to know,

But what I am, want teaches me to think on:

A man thronged up with cold; my veins are chill,

And have no more of life than may suffice

To give my tongue that heat to crave your help,

Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,

For that I am a man, pray see me buried.

He falls down





MASTER Die, quotha? Now, gods forbid’t an I have a gown here! To Pericles, lifting him up from the ground Come, put it on, keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and we’ll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting-days, and moreo’er puddings and flapjacks, and thou shalt be welcome.

PERICLES I thank you, sir.

SECOND FISHERMAN Hark you, my friend, you said you could not beg?

PERICLES I did but crave.

SECOND FISHERMAN But crave? Then I’ll turn craver too, an so I shall scape whipping.

PERICLES Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?

SECOND FISHERMAN O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your beggars were whipped I would wish no better office than to be beadle.

MASTER Thine office, knave—

SECOND FISHERMAN Is to draw up the other nets. I’ll go.

Exit with Third Fisherman

PERICLES (aside)

How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!

MASTER ⌈seating himself by Pericles⌉ Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?

PERICLES Not well.

MASTER Why, I’ll tell you. This is called Pentapolis, and our king the good Simonides.

PERICLES

’The good Simonides’ do you call him?

MASTER Ay, sir, and he deserves so to be called for his peaceable reign and good government.

PERICLES

He is a happy king, since from his subjects

He gains the name of good by his government.

How far is his court distant from this shore?

MASTER Marry, sir, some half a day’s journey. And I’ll tell you, he hath a fair daughter, and tomorrow is her birthday, and there are princes and knights come from all parts of the world to joust and tourney for her love.

PERICLES

Were but my fortunes answerable

To my desires I could wish to make one there.

MASTER O, sir, things must be as they may, and what a man cannot get himself, he may lawfully deal for with his wife’s soul.

Enter the other two Fishermen drawing up a net





SECOND FISHERMAN Help, master, help! Here’s a fish hangs in the net like a poor man’s right in the law; ’twill hardly come out.

Before help comes, up comes their prize





Ha, bots on’t, ’tis come at last, and ’tis turned to a

rusty armour.

PERICLES

An armour, friends? I pray you let me see it.

(Aside) Thanks, fortune, yet that after all thy crosses

Thou giv‘st me somewhat to repair my losses,

And though it was mine own, part of my heritage

Which my dead father did bequeath to me

With this strict charge ev’n as he left his life:

‘Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield

‘Twixt me and death,’ and pointed to this brace,

‘For that it saved me, keep it. In like necessity,

The which the Gods forfend, the same may defend thee.’

It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,

Till the rough seas that spares not any man

Took it in rage, though calmed have giv’n’t again.

I thank thee for’t. My shipwreck now’s no ill,

Since I have here my father gave in ’s will.

MASTER What mean you, sir?

PERICLES

To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,

For it was sometime target to a king.

I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly,

And for his sake I wish the having of it,

And that you’d guide me to your sov’reign’s court,

Where with’t I may appear a gentleman.

And if that ever my low fortune’s better,

I’ll pay your bounties, till then rest your debtor.

MASTER Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?

PERICLES

I’ll show the virtue I have learned in arms.

MASTER Why, d‘ye take it, and the gods give thee good on’t!

SECOND FISHERMAN Ay, but hark you, my friend, ’twas we that made up this garment through the rough seams of the waters. There are certain condolements, certain vails. I hope, sir, if you thrive, you’ll remember from whence you had this.

PERICLES Believe’t, I will.

By your furtherance I’m clothed in steel,

And spite of all the rapture of the sea

This jewel holds his building on my arm.

Unto thy value I will mount myself

Upon a courser whose delightsome steps

Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.

Only, my friends, I yet am unprovided

Of a pair of bases.

SECOND FISHERMAN We’ll sure provide. Thou shalt have my best gown to make thee a pair, and I’ll bring thee to the court myself.

PERICLES

Then honour be but equal to my will,

This day I’ll rise, or else add ill to ill.

Exeunt with nets and armour





Sc. 6 Sennet.Enter King Simonides and Thaisa, with Lords in attendance, and sit on two thrones



KING SIMONIDES

Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?

FIRST LORD They are, my liege,

And stay your coming to present themselves.

KING SIMONIDES

Return them we are ready; and our daughter,

In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,

Sits here like beauty’s child, whom nature gat

For men to see and, seeing, wonder at. Exit one

THAISA

It pleaseth you, my father, to express

My commendations great, whose merit’s less.

KING SIMONIDES

It’s fit it should be so, for princes are

A model which heav’n makes like to itself.

As jewels lose their glory if neglected,

So princes their renown, if not respected.

’Tis now your office, daughter, to entertain

The labour of each knight in his device.

THAISA

Which, to preserve mine honour, I’ll perform.

Flourish.The first knight passes by richly armed, and his page before him, bearing his device on his shield, delivers it to the Lady Thaisa





KING SIMONIDES

Who is the first that doth prefer himself?

THAISA

A knight of Sparta, my renowned father,

And the device he bears upon his shield

Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun.

The word, Lux tua vita mihi.

She presents it to the King





KING SIMONIDES

He loves you well that holds his life of you.

He returns it to the page, who exits with the first knight.



Flourish.The second knight passes by richly armed, and his page before him, bearing his device on his shield, delivers it to the Lady Thaisa





Who is the second that presents himself?

THAISA

A prince of Macedon, my royal father,

And the device he bears upon his shield

An armed knight that’s conquered by a lady.

The motto thus: Piùe per dolcezza che per forza.

she presents it to the King





KING SIMONIDES

You win him more by lenity than force.

He returns it to the page, who exits with the second knight.



Flourish.The third knight passes by richly armed, and his page before him, bearing his device on his shield, delivers it to the Lady Thaisa





And what’s the third?

THAISA

The third of Antioch,

And his device a wreath of chivalry.

The word, Me pompae provexit apex.

She presents it to the King





KING SIMONIDES

Desire of renown he doth devise,

The which hath drawn him to this enterprise.

He returns it to the page, who exits with the third knight.



Flourish.The fourth knight passes by richly armed, and his page before him, bearing his device on his shield, delivers it to the Lady Thaisa





What is the fourth?

THAISA

A knight of Athens bearing

A burning torch that’s turned upside down.

The word, Qui me alit me extinguit.

She presents it to the King





KING SIMONIDES

Which shows that beauty hath this power and will,

Which can as well inflame as it can kill.

⌈He returns it to the page, who exits with the fourth knight.⌉



⌈Flourish.⌉ The fifth Knight passes by ⌈richly armed, and his page before him, bearing his device on his shield, delivers it to the Lady Thaisa⌉





And who the fifth?

THAISA The fifth, a prince of Corinth,

Presents an hand environèd with clouds,

Holding out gold that’s by the touchstone tried.

The motto thus: Sic spectanda fides.

⌈She presents it to the King⌉





KING SIMONIDES

So faith is to be looked into.

⌈He returns it to the page, who exits with the fifth knight.⌉



⌈Flourish.l The sixth knight, Pericles, in a rusty armour, who, having neither page to deliver his shield nor shield to deliver, presents his device unto the Lady Thaisa





And what’s the sixth and last, the which the knight

himself

With such a graceful courtesy delivereth?

THAISA

He seems to be a stranger, but his present is

A withered branch that’s only green at top.

The motto, In hac spe vivo.

KING SIMONIDES

From the dejected state wherein he is

He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.

FIRST LORD

He had need mean better than his outward show

Can any way speak in his just commend,

For by his rusty outside he appears

T’have practised more the whipstock than the lance.

SECOND LORD

He well may be a stranger, for he comes

Unto an honoured triumph strangely furnished.

THIRD LORD

And on set purpose let his armour rust

Until this day, to scour it in the dust.

KING SIMONIDES

Opinion’s but a fool, that makes us scan

The outward habit for the inward man.

⌈Cornetts⌉

But stay, the knights are coming. We will withdraw

Into the gallery. ⌈Exeunt⌉

⌈Cornetts and⌉ great shouts ⌈within⌉, and all cry



‘The mean knight!’





Sc. 7 ⌈A stately banquet is brought in.1 Enter King



Simonides, Thaisa ⌈and their train at one door⌉, and ⌈at another door⌉ a Marshal ⌈conducting⌉ Pericles and the other knights from tilting





KING SIMONIDES (to the knights)

To say you’re welcome were superfluous.

To place upon the volume of your deeds

As in a title page your worth in arms

Were more than you expect, or more than’s fit,

Since every worth in show commends itself.

Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast.

You’re princes, and my guests.

THAISA (to Pericles) But you, my knight and guest; To whom this wreath of victory I give, And crown you king of this day’s happiness.

PERICLES

’Tis more by fortune, lady, than my merit.

KING SIMONIDES

Call it by what you will, the day is yours,

And here I hope is none that envies it.

In framing artists art hath thus decreed,

To make some good, but others to exceed.

You are her laboured scholar. (To Thaisa) Come,

queen o’th’ feast—

For, daughter, so you are—here take your place.

(To Marshal) Marshal the rest as they deserve their

grace.

KNIGHTS

We are honoured much by good Simonides.

KING SIMONIDES

Your presence glads our days; honour we love,

For who hates honour hates the gods above.

MARSHAL (to Pericles)

Sir, yonder is your place.

PERICLES Some other is more fit.

FIRST KNIGHT

Contend not, sir, for we are gentlemen

Have neither in our hearts nor outward eyes

Envied the great, nor shall the low despise.

PERICLES

You are right courteous knights.

KING SIMONIDES Sit, Sir, sit.

⌈Pericles sits directly over against the King and Thaisa. The guests feed apace. Pericles sits still and eats nothing⌉



⌈Aside⌉ By Jove I wonder, that is king of thoughts, These cates distaste me, he but thought upon.





THAISA ⌈aside⌉

By Juno, that is queen of marriage,

I am amazed all viands that I eat

Do seem unsavoury, wishing him my meat.

⌈To the King⌉ Sure he’s a gallant gentleman.

KING SIMONIDES

He’s but a country gentleman.

He’s done no more than other knights have done.

He’s broke a staff or so, so let it pass.

THAISA ⌈aside⌉

To me he seems like diamond to glass.

PERICLES ⌈aside⌉

Yon king’s to me like to my father’s picture,

Which tells me in what glory once he was—

Had princes sit like stars about his throne,

And he the sun for them to reverence.

None that beheld him but like lesser lights

Did vail their crowns to his supremacy;

Where now his son’s a glow-worm in the night,

The which hath fire in darkness, none in light;

Whereby I see that time’s the king of men;

He’s both their parent and he is their grave,

And gives them what he will, not what they crave.

KING SIMONIDES What, are you merry, knights? ⌈THE OTHER KNIGHTS⌉

Who can be other in this royal presence?

KING SIMONIDES

Here with a cup that’s stored unto the brim,

As you do love, full to your mistress’ lips,

We drink this health to you.

⌈THE OTHER KNIGHTS⌉ We thank your grace.

KING SIMONIDES

Yet pause a while. Yon knight doth sit too

melancholy,

As if the entertainment in our court

Had not a show might countervail his worth.

Note it not you, Thaisa?

THAISA What is’t to me, my father?

KING SIMONIDES

O, attend, my daughter. Princes in this

Should live like gods above, who freely give

To everyone that come to honour them.

And princes not so doing are like gnats

Which make a sound but, killed, are wondered at.

Therefore to make his entertain more sweet,

Here bear this standing-bowl of wine to him.

THAISA

Alas, my father, it befits not me

Unto a stranger knight to be so bold.

He may my proffer take for an offence,

Since men take women’s gifts for impudence.

KING SIMONIDES

How? Do as I bid you, or you’ll move me else.

THAISA (aside)

Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.

KING SIMONIDES

Furthermore, tell him we desire to know

Of whence he is, his name and parentage.

⌈Thaisa bears the cup to Pericles⌉

THAISA

The King my father, sir, has drunk to you,

Wishing it so much blood unto your life.

PERICLES

I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.

He pledges the King

THAISA

And further he desires to know of you

Of whence you are, your name and parentage.

PERICLES

A gentleman of Tyre, my name Pericles,

My education been in arts and arms,

Who, looking for adventures in the world,

Was by the rough unconstant seas bereft

Unfortunately both of ships and men,

And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.

⌈Thaisa returns to the King⌉





THAISA

He thanks your grace, names himself Pericles,

A gentleman of Tyre, who, seeking adventures,

Was solely by misfortune of the seas

Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.

KING SIMONIDES

Now by the gods I pity his mishaps,

And will awake him from his melancholy.

⌈Simonides, rising from his state, goes forthwith and embraces Pericles⌉





Be cheered, for what misfortune hath impaired you of,

Fortune by my help can repair to you.

My self and country both shall be your friends,

And presently a goodly milk-white steed

And golden spurs I first bestow upon you,

The prizes due your merit, and ordained

For this day’s enterprise.

PERICLES

Your kingly courtesy I thankfully accept.

KING SIMONIDES

Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,

And waste the time which looks for other revels.

Ev’n in your armours, as you are addressed,

Your limbs will well become a soldier’s dance.

I will not have excuse with saying this,

‘Loud music is too harsh for ladies’ heads’,

Since they love men in arms as well as beds.

The knights dance



So this was well asked, ’twas so well performed.

Come, here’s a lady that wants breathing too.

(To Pericles) And I have heard, sir, that the knights of

Tyre

Are excellent in making ladies trip,

And that their measures are as excellent.

PERICLES

In those that practise them they are, my lord.

KING SIMONIDES

O, that’s as much as you would be denied

Of your fair courtesy. Unclasp, unclasp.

They dance





Thanks, gentlemen, to all. All have done well,

(To Pericles) But you the best.—Lights, pages, to

conduct

These knights unto their sev’ral lodgings.—Yours, sir,

We have giv’n order should be next our own.

PERICLES I am at your grace’s pleasure.

KING SIMONIDES

Princes, it is too late to talk of love,

And that’s the mark I know you level at.

Therefore each one betake him to his rest;

Tomorrow all for speeding do their best.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





Sc. 8 Enter Helicanus and Aeschines



HELICANUS

No, Aeschines, know this of me:

Antiochus from incest lived not free,

For which the most high gods, not minding longer

To hold the vengeance that they had in store

Due to this heinous capital offence,

Even in the height and pride of all his glory,

When he was seated in a chariot

Of an inestimable value, and

His daughter with him, both apparelled all in jewels,

A fire from heaven came and shrivelled up

Their bodies e’en to loathing, for they so stunk

That all those eyes adored them ere their fall

Scorn now their hands should give them burial.

AESCHINES

’Twas very strange.

HELICANUS And yet but justice, for though

This king were great, his greatness was no guard To bar heav’n’s shaft, but sin had his reward.

AESCHINES ’Tis very true.

Enter three Lords, and stand aside





FIRST LORD

See, not a man in private conference

Or council has respect with him but he.

SECOND LORD

It shall no longer grieve without reproof.

THIRD LORD

And cursed be he that will not second it.

FIRST LORD

Follow me, then.—Lord Helicane, a word.

HELICANUS

With me? And welcome. Happy day, my lords.

FIRST LORD

Know that our griefs are risen to the top,

And now at length they overflow their banks.

HELICANUS

Your griefs? For what? Wrong not your prince you love.

FIRST LORD

Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane,

But if the prince do live, let us salute him

Or know what ground’s made happy by his step,

And be resolved he lives to govern us,

Or dead, give ’s cause to mourn his funeral

And leave us to our free election.

SECOND LORD

Whose death indeed’s the strongest in our censure,

And knowing this—kingdoms without a head,

Like goodly buildings left without a roof,

Soon fall to utter ruin—your noble self,

That best know how to rule and how to reign,

We thus submit unto as sovereign.

ALL ⌈kneeling⌉ Live, noble Helicane!

HELICANUS

By honour’s cause, forbear your suffrages.

If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.

⌈The lords rise⌉





Take I your wish I leap into the seas

Where’s hourly trouble for a minute’s ease,

But if I cannot win you to this love,

A twelvemonth longer then let me entreat you

Further to bear the absence of your king;

If in which time expired he not return,

I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.

Go, seek your noble prince like noble subjects,

And in your search spend your adventurous worth,

Whom if you find and win unto return,

You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.

FIRST LORD

To wisdom he’s a fool that will not yield,

And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,

We with our travels will endeavour us.

If in the world he live we’ll seek him out;

If in his grave he rest, we’ll find him there.

HELICANUS

Then you love us, we you, and we’ll clasp hands.

When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands. Exeunt





Sc. 8a Enter Pericles with Gentlemen with lights



FIRST GENTLEMAN

Here is your lodging, sir.

PERICLES Pray leave me private.

Only for instant solace pleasure me

With some delightful instrument, with which,

And with my former practice, I intend

To pass away the tediousness of night, 5

Though slumbers were more fitting.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Presently.

Exit First Gentleman





SECOND GENTLEMAN

Your will’s obeyed in all things, for our master

Commanded you be disobeyed in nothing.

Enter First Gentleman with a stringed instrument





PERICLES

I thank you. Now betake you to your pillows,

And to the nourishment of quiet sleep. 10

Exeunt Gentlemen



Pericles plays and sings





Day—that hath still that sovereignty to draw back

The empire of the night, though for a while

In darkness she usurp—brings morning on.

I will go give his grace that salutation

Morning requires of me.

Exit with instrument





Sc. 9 Enter King Simonides at one door reading of a letter, the Knights enter ⌈at another door⌉ and meet him



FIRST KNIGHT

Good morrow to the good Simonides.

KING SIMONIDES

Knights, from my daughter this I let you know:

That for this twelvemonth she’ll not undertake

A married life. Her reason to herself

Is only known, which from her none can get.

SECOND KNIGHT

May we not have access to her, my lord?

KING SIMONIDES

Faith, by no means. It is impossible,

She hath so strictly tied her to her chamber.

One twelve moons more she’ll wear Diana’s liv’ry.

This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vowed,

And on her virgin honour will not break it.

THIRD KNIGHT

Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.

Exeunt Knights





KING SIMONIDES

So, they are well dispatched. Now to my daughter’s

letter.

She tells me here she’ll wed the stranger knight,

Or never more to view nor day nor light.

I like that well. Nay, how absolute she’s in‘t,

Not minding whether I dislike or no!

Mistress, ’tis well, I do commend your choice,

And will no longer have it be delayed.

Enter Pericles





Soft, here he comes. I must dissemble that

In show, I have determined on in heart.

PERICLES

All fortune to the good Simonides.

KING SIMONIDES

To you as much, sir. I am beholden to you

For your sweet music this last night. My ears,

I do protest, were never better fed

With such delightful pleasing harmony.

PERICLES

It is your grace’s pleasure to commend,

Not my desert.

KING SIMONIDES Sir, you are music’s master.

PERICLES

The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.

KING SIMONIDES

Let me ask you one thing. What think you of my daughter?

PERICLES

A most virtuous princess.

KING SIMONIDES And fair, too, is she not?

PERICLES

As a fair day in summer; wondrous fair.

KING SIMONIDES

My daughter, sir, thinks very well of you;

So well indeed that you must be her master

And she will be your scholar; therefore look to it.

PERICLES

I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.

KING SIMONIDES

She thinks not so. Peruse this writing else.

He gives the letter to Pericles, who reads





PERICLES (aside)

What’s here?—a letter that she loves the knight of Tyre?

’Tis the King’s subtlety to have my life.

⌈He prostrates himself at the King’s feet⌉





O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,

A stranger and distressed gentleman

That never aimed so high to love your daughter,

But bent all offices to honour her.

Never did thought of mine levy offence,

Nor never did my actions yet commence

A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.

KING SIMONIDES

Thou liest like a traitor.

PERICLES Traitor?

KING SIMONIDES Ay, traitor,

That thus disguised art stol’n into my court

With witchcraft of thy actions to bewitch

The yielding spirit of my tender child. 50

PERICLES ⌈rising⌉

Who calls me traitor, unless it be the King,

Ev’n in his bosom I will write the lie.

KING SIMONIDES (aside)

Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.

PERICLES

My actions are as noble as my blood,

That never relished of a base descent. 55

I came unto your court in search of honour,

And not to be a rebel to your state;

And he that otherwise accounts of me,

This sword shall prove he’s honour’s enemy.

KING SIMONIDES

I shall prove otherwise, since both your practice

And her consent therein is evident

There, by my daughter’s hand, as she can witness.

Enter Thaisa





PERICLES (to Thaisa)

Then as you are as virtuous as fair,

By what you hope of heaven or desire

By your best wishes here i‘th’ world fulfilled,

Resolve your angry father if my tongue

Did e’er solicit, or my hand subscribe

To any syllable made love to you.

THAISA Why, sir, say if you had,

Who takes offence at that would make me glad?

KING SIMONIDES

How, minion, are you so peremptory?

(Aside) I am glad on’t.—Is this a fit match for you?

A straggling Theseus, born we know not where,

One that hath neither blood nor merit

For thee to hope for, or himself to challenge

Of thy perfections e’en the least allowance.

THAISA (kneeling)

Suppose his birth were base, when that his life

Shows that he is not so, yet he hath virtue,

The very ground of all nobility,

Enough to make him noble. I entreat you

To remember that I am in love,

The power of which love cannot be confined

By th’ power of your will. Most royal father,

What with my pen I have in secret written

With my tongue now I openly confirm,

Which is I have no life but in his love,

Nor any being but in joying of his worth.

KING SIMONIDES

Equals to equals, good to good is joined.

This not being so, the bavin of your mind

In rashness kindled must again be quenched,

Or purchase our displeasure.—And for you, sir,

First learn to know I banish you my court,

And yet I scorn our rage should stoop so low.

For your ambition, sir, I’ll have your life.

THAISA (to Pericles)

For every drop of blood he sheds of yours

He’ll draw another from his only child.

KING SIMONIDES

I’ll tame you, yea, I’ll bring you in subjection.

Will you not having my consent

Bestow your love and your affections

Upon a stranger?—(aside) who for aught I know

May be, nor can I think the contrary,

As great in blood as I myself.

⌈He catches Thaisa rashly by the hand⌉





Therefore hear you, mistress: either frame your will to

mine—

⌈He catches Pericles rashly by the hand⌉

And you, sir, hear you: either be ruled by me—

Or I shall make you

⌈He claps their hands together⌉ man and wife. 105





Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too,

Pericles and Thaisa kiss





And being joined, I’ll thus your hopes destroy,

⌈He parts them⌉





And for your further grief, God give you joy. What, are you pleased?

THAISA Yes, (to Pericles) if you love me, sir.

PERICLES

Ev’n as my life my blood that fosters it.

KING SIMONIDES

What, are you both agreed?

PERICLES and THAISA Yes, if’t please your majesty.

KING SIMONIDES

It pleaseth me so well that I will see you wed,

Then with what haste you can, get you to bed. Exeunt





Sc. 10 Enter Gower



GOWER

Now sleep y-slacked hath the rout,

No din but snores the house about,

Made louder by the o‘erfed breast

Of this most pompous marriage feast.

The cat with eyne of burning coal

Now couches fore the mouse’s hole,

And crickets sing at th’oven’s mouth

As the blither for their drouth.

Hymen hath brought the bride to bed,

Where by the loss of maidenhead

A babe is moulded. Be attent,

And time that is so briefly spent

With your fine fancies quaintly eche.

What’s dumb in show, I’ll plain with speech.

Dumb show.



Enter Pericles and Simonides at one door with attendants. A messenger comes ⌈hastily⌉ in to them, kneels, and gives Pericles a letter. Pericles shows it Simonides; the lords kneel to him. Then enter Thaisa with child, with Lychorida, a nurse. The King shows her the letter. She rejoices. She and Pericles take leave of her father and depart with I,,ychorida at one door; Simonides ⌈and attendants⌉ depart at another





By many a dern and painful perch

Of Pericles the care-full search,

By the four opposing coigns

Which the world together joins,

Is made with all due diligence

That horse and sail and high expense

Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre

Fame answering the most strange enquire,

To th’ court of King Simonides

Are letters brought, the tenor these:

Antiochus and his daughter dead,

The men of Tyrus on the head

Of Helicanus would set on

The crown of Tyre, but he will none.

The mutiny there he hastes t‘appease,

Says to ’em if King Pericles

Come not home in twice six moons

He, obedient to their dooms,

Will take the crown. The sum of this

Brought hither to Pentapolis

Y-ravishèd the regions round,

And everyone with claps can sound

‘Our heir-apparent is a king!

Who dreamt, who thought of such a thing?’

Brief he must hence depart to Tyre;

His queen with child makes her desire—

Which who shall cross?—along to go.

Omit we all their dole and woe.

Lychorida her nurse she takes,

And so to sea. Their vessel shakes

On Neptune’s billow. Half the flood

Hath their keel cut, but fortune’s mood

Varies again. The grizzled north

Disgorges such a tempest forth

That as a duck for life that dives,

So up and down the poor ship drives.

The lady shrieks, and well-a-near

Does fall in travail with her fear,

And what ensues in this fell storm

Shall for itself itself perform;

I nill relate; action may

Conveniently the rest convey,

Which might not what by me is told.

In your imagination hold

This stage the ship, upon whose deck

The sea-tossed Pericles appears to speke. Exit





Sc. 11 ⌈Thunder and lightning.⌉ Enter Pericles a-shipboard



PERICLES

The god of this great vast rebuke these surges

Which wash both heav’n and hell; and thou that hast

Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,

Having called them from the deep. O still

Thy deaf‘ning dreadful thunders, gently quench

Thy nimble sulph’rous flashes.—O, ho, Lychorida!

How does my queen?—Thou stormest venomously.

Wilt thou spit all thyself The seaman’s whistle

Is as a whisper in the ears of death,

Unheard.—Lychorida!—Lucina, O!

Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle

To those that cry by night, convey thy deity

Aboard our dancing boat, make swift the pangs

Of my queen’s travails!—Now, Lychorida.

Enter Lychorida with an infant





LYCHORIDA

Here is a thing too young for such a place,

Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I

Am like to do. Take in your arms this piece

Of your dead queen.

PERICLES How, how, Lychorida?

LYCHORIDA

Patience, good sir, do not assist the storm.

Here’s all that is left living of your queen,

A little daughter. For the sake of it

Be manly, and take comfort.

PERICLES O you gods!

Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,

And snatch them straight away? We here below

Recall not what we give, and therein may

Use honour with you.

LYCHORIDA Patience, good sir,

E’en for this charge.

She gives him the infant. ⌈Pericles, looking mournfully upon it, shakes his head, and weeps⌉





PERICLES Now mild may be thy life,

For a more blust‘rous birth had never babe;

Quiet and gentle thy conditions, for

Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world

That e’er was prince’s child; happy what follows.

Thou hast as chiding a nativity

As fire, air, water, earth, and heav’n can make

To herald thee from th’ womb. Poor inch of nature,

Ev’n at the first thy loss is more than can

Thy partage quit with all thou canst find here.

Now the good gods throw their best eyes upon’t.

Enter ⌈the Master⌉ and a Sailor





⌈MASTER⌉ What, courage, sir! God save you.

PERICLES

Courage enough, I do not fear the flaw;

It hath done to me its worst. Yet for the love

Of this poor infant, this fresh new seafarer,

I would it would be quiet.

⌈MASTER⌉ (calling) Slack the bow-lines, there.—Thou wilt not, wilt thou? Blow, and split thyself.

SAILOR But searoom, an the brine and cloudy billow kiss the moon, I care not.

⌈MASTER⌉ (to Pericles) Sir, your queen must overboard. The sea works high, the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be cleared of the dead.

PERICLES

That’s but your superstition.

⌈MASTER⌉ Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still observed, and we are strong in custom. Therefore briefly yield ’er, for she must overboard straight.

PERICLES

As you think meet. Most wretched queen!

LYCHORIDA Here she lies, sir.

She ⌈draws the curtains and discovers⌉ the body of Thaisa in a ⌈bed. Pericles gives Lychorida the infant⌉





PERICLES (to Thaisa)

A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear,

No light, no fire. Th‘unfriendly elements

Forgot thee utterly, nor have I time

To give thee hallowed to thy grave, but straight

Must cast thee, scarcely coffined, in the ooze,

Where, for a monument upon thy bones

And aye-remaining lamps, the belching whale

And humming water must o’erwhelm thy corpse,

Lying with simple shetts.—O Lychorida,

Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink, and paper,

My casket and my jewels, and bid Nicander

Bring me the satin coffer. Lay the babe

Upon the pillow. Hie thee whiles I say

A priestly farewell to her. Suddenly, woman.

Exit Lychorida





⌈SAILOR⌉ Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches caulked and bitumed ready.

PERICLES

I thank thee. ⌈To the Master⌉ Mariner, say, what coast is this?

⌈MASTER⌉

We are near Tarsus.

PERICLES

Thither, gentle mariner,

Alter thy course from Tyre. When canst thou reach it? ⌈MASTER⌉

By break of day, if the wind cease.

PERICLES

Make for Tarsus.

There will I visit Cleon, for the babe

Cannot hold out to Tyrus. There I’ll leave it

At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner.

I’ll bring the body presently.

⌈Exit Master at one door and Sailor beneath the hatches. Exit Pericles to Thaisa, closing the curtains⌉





Sc. 12 Enter Lord Cerimon with a ⌈poor man and a⌉ servant



CERIMON

Philemon, ho!

Enter Philemon





PHILEMON Doth my lord call?

CERIMON

Get fire and meat for those poor men.

⌈Exit Philemon⌉





‘T’as been a turbulent and stormy night.

SERVANT

I have seen many, but such a night as this

Till now I ne’er endured.

CERIMON

Your master will be dead ere you return.

There’s nothing can be ministered in nature

That can recover him. ⌈To poor man⌉ Give this to th’

pothecary

And tell me how it works.

⌈Exeunt poor man and servant⌉



Enter two Gentlemen





FIRST GENTLEMAN Good morrow.

SECOND GENTLEMAN

Good morrow to your lordship.

CERIMON Gentlemen,

Why do you stir so early?

FIRST GENTLEMAN Sir,

Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,

Shook as the earth did quake.

The very principals did seem to rend

And all to topple. Pure surprise and fear

Made me to quit the house.

SECOND GENTLEMAN

That is the cause we trouble you so early;

’Tis not our husbandry.

CERIMON O, you say well.

FIRST GENTLEMAN

But I much marvel that your lordship should,

Having rich tire about you, at this hour

Shake off the golden slumber of repose. ’Tis most

strange,

Nature to be so conversant with pain,

Being thereto not compelled.

CERIMON I held it ever

Virtue and cunning were endowments greater

Than nobleness and riches. Careless heirs

May the two latter darken and dispend,

But immortality attends the former,

Making a man a god. ‘Tis known I ever

Have studied physic, through which secret art,

By turning o’er authorities, I have,

Together with my practice, made familiar

To me and to my aid the blest infusions

That dwells in vegetives, in metals, stones,

And so can speak of the disturbances

That nature works, and of her cures, which doth

give me

A more content and cause of true delight

Than to be thirsty after tott’ring honour,

Or tie my pleasure up in silken bags

To glad the fool and death.

SECOND GENTLEMAN Your honour has

Through Ephesus poured forth your charity,

And hundreds call themselves your creatures who by

you

Have been restored. And not alone your knowledge,

Your personal pain, but e’en your purse still open

Hath built Lord Cerimon such strong renown

As time shall never—

Enter ⌈Philemon and one or⌉ two with a chest





⌈PHILEMON⌉ So, lift there.

CERIMON What’s that? ⌈PHILEMON⌉ Sir, even now

The sea tossed up upon our shore this chest.

’Tis off some wreck.

CERIMON Set’t down. Let’s look upon’t.

SECOND GENTLEMAN

’Tis like a coffin, sir.

CERIMON Whate’er it be,

’Tis wondrous heavy.—Did the sea cast it up?

⌈PHILEMON⌉

I never saw so huge a billow, sir,

Or a more eager.

CERIMON Wrench it open straight.

The others start to work





If the sea’s stomach be o‘ercharged with gold

’Tis by a good constraint of queasy fortune

It belches upon us.

SECOND GENTLEMAN ’Tis so, my lord.

CERIMON

How close ’tis caulked and bitumed!

⌈They force the lid⌉





Soft, it smells

Most sweetly in my sense.

SECOND GENTLEMAN A delicate odour.

CERIMON

As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.

They take the lid off





O you most potent gods! What’s here—a corpse?

SECOND GENTLEMAN

Most strange.

CERIMON Shrouded in cloth of state, and crowned,

Balmed and entreasured with full bags of spices.

A passport, too!

He takes a paper from the chest





Apollo perfect me i’th’ characters.

‘Here I give to understand,

If e’er this coffin drives a-land,

I, King Pericles, have lost

This queen worth all our mundane cost.

Who finds her, give her burying;

She was the daughter of a king.

Besides this treasure for a fee,

The gods requite his charity.’





If thou liv’st, Pericles, thou hast a heart

That even cracks for woe. This chanced tonight.

SECOND GENTLEMAN

Most likely, sir.

CERIMON Nay, certainly tonight,

For look how fresh she looks. They were too rash

That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within.

Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet. ⌈Exit Philemon⌉

Death may usurp on nature many hours,

And yet the fire of life kindle again

The o’erpressed spirits. I have heard

Of an Egyptian nine hours dead

Who was by good appliances recovered.

Enter ⌈Philemon⌉ with napkins and fire





Well said, well said, the fire and cloths.

The still and woeful music that we have,

Cause it to sound, beseech you.

Music





The vial once more.

How thou stirr‘st, thou block! The music there!

I pray you give her air. Gentlemen,

This queen will live. Nature awakes, a warmth

Breathes out of her. She hath not been entranced

Above five hours. See how she ’gins to blow

Into life’s flow’r again.

FIRST GENTLEMAN The heavens

Through you increase our wonder, and set up

Your fame for ever.

CERIMON She is alive. Behold,

Her eyelids, cases to those heav’nly jewels

Which Pericles hath lost,

Begin to part their fringes of bright gold.

The diamonds of a most praised water

Doth appear to make the world twice rich.—Live,

And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,

Rare as you seem to be.

She moves





THAISA O dear Diana,

Where am I? Where’s my lord? What world is this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN

Is not this strange?

FIRST GENTLEMAN Most rare.

CERIMON Hush, gentle neighbours. Lend me your hands. To the next chamber bear her. Get linen. Now this matter must be looked to, For her relapse is mortal. Come, come, And Aesculapius guide us. They carry her away. Exeunt





Sc. 13 Enter Pericles at Tarsus, with Cleon and Dionyza, and Lychorida with a babe



PERICLES

Most honoured Cleon, I must needs be gone.

My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands

In a litigious peace. You and your lady

Take from my heart all thankfulness. The gods

Make up the rest upon you!

CLEON Your strokes of fortune, Though they hurt you mortally, yet glance Full woundingly on us.

DIONYZA O your sweet queen!

That the strict fates had pleased you’d brought her

hither

T’have blessed mine eyes with her!

PERICLES

We cannot but obey

The pow‘rs above us. Should I rage and roar

As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end

Must be as ’tis. My gentle babe Marina,

Whom for she was born at sea I have named so,

Here I charge your charity withal, and leave her

The infant of your care, beseeching you

To give her princely training, that she may be

Mannered as she is born.

CLEON Fear not, my lord, but think

Your grace, that fed my country with your corn—

For which the people’s pray’rs still fall upon you—

Must in your child be thought on. If neglection

Should therein make me vile, the common body

By you relieved would force me to my duty.

But if to that my nature need a spur,

The gods revenge it upon me and mine

To th’ end of generation.

PERICLES I believe you.

Your honour and your goodness teach me to’t

Without your vows.—Till she be married, madam,

By bright Diana, whom we honour all,

Unscissored shall this hair of mine remain,

Though I show ill in’t. So I take my leave.

Good madam, make me blessed in your care

In bringing up my child.

DIONYZA I have one myself,

Who shall not be more dear to my respect

Than yours, my lord.

PERICLES Madam, my thanks and prayers.

CLEON

We’ll bring your grace e‘en to the edge o’th’ shore,

Then give you up to th’ masted Neptune and

The gentlest winds of heaven.

PERICLES

I will embrace your offer.—Come, dear’st madam.—

O, no tears, Lychorida, no tears.

Look to your little mistress, on whose grace

You may depend hereafter.—Come, my lord. Exeunt





Sc. 14 Enter Cerimon and Thaisa



CERIMON

Madam, this letter and some certain jewels

Lay with you in your coffer, which are all

At your command. Know you the character?

THAISA

It is my lord’s. That I was shipped at sea

I well remember, ev’n on my eaning time,

But whether there delivered, by th’ holy gods

I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,

My wedded lord, I ne‘er shall see again,

A vestal liv’ry will I take me to,

And never more have joy.

CERIMON

Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,

Diana’s temple is not distant far,

Where till your date expire you may abide.

Moreover, if you please a niece of mine

Shall there attend you.

THAISA

My recompense is thanks, that’s all,

Yet my good will is great, though the gift small. Exeunt





Sc. 15 Enter Gower



GOWER

Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,

Welcomed and settled to his own desire.

His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus,

Unto Diana there ’s a votaress.

Now to Marina bend your mind,

Whom our fast-growing scene must find

At Tarsus, and by Cleon trained

In music, letters; who hath gained

Of education all the grace,

Which makes her both the heart and place

Of gen‘ral wonder. But, alack,

That monster envy, oft the wrack

Of earned praise, Marina’s life

Seeks to take off by treason’s knife,

And in this kind our Cleon has

One daughter, and a full-grown lass

E’en ripe for marriage-rite. This maid

Hight Philoten, and it is said

For certain in our story she

Would ever with Marina be,

Be’t when they weaved the sleided silk

With fingers long, small, white as milk;

Or when she would with sharp nee‘le wound

The cambric which she made more sound

By hurting it, or when to th’ lute

She sung, and made the night bird mute,

That still records with moan; or when

She would with rich and constant pen

Vail to her mistress Dian. Still

This Philoten contends in skill

With absolute Marina; so

With dove of Paphos might the crow

Vie feathers white. Marina gets

All praises which are paid as debts,

And not as given. This so darks

In Philoten all graceful marks

That Cleon’s wife with envy rare

A present murder does prepare

For good Marina, that her daughter

Might stand peerless by this slaughter.

The sooner her vile thoughts to stead

Lychorida, our nurse, is dead,

⌈A tomb is revealed⌉

And cursed Dionyza hath

The pregnant instrument of wrath

Pressed for this blow. Th’unborn event

I do commend to your content,

Only I carry winged Time

Post on the lame feet of my rhyme,

Which never could I so convey

Unless your thoughts went on my way.

⌈Enter Dionyza with Leonine⌉

Dionyza does appear,

With Leonine, a murderer. Exit





DIONYZA

Thy oath remember. Thou hast sworn to do’t.

‘Tis but a blow, which never shall be known.

Thou canst not do a thing i’th’ world so soon

To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,

Which is but cold, or fanning love thy bosom

Unflame too nicely, nor let pity, which

E’en women have cast off, melt thee; but be

A soldier to thy purpose.

LEONINE I will do’t;

But yet she is a goodly creature.

DIONYZA

The fitter then the gods should have her.

Enter Marina ⌈to the tomb⌉ with a basket of flowers





Here she comes, weeping her only nurse’s death.

Thou art resolved.

LEONINE I am resolved.

MARINA

No, I will rob Tellus of her weed

To strew thy grave with flow’rs. The yellows, blues,

The purple violets and marigolds

Shall as a carpet hang upon thy tomb

While summer days doth last. Ay me, poor maid,

Born in a tempest when my mother died,

This world to me is but a ceaseless storm

Whirring me from my friends.

DIONYZA

How now, Marina, why do you keep alone?

How chance my daughter is not with you?

Do not consume your blood with sorrowing.

Have you a nurse of me. Lord, how your favour

Is changed with this unprofitable woe!

Give me your flowers. Come, o’er the sea margin

Walk with Leonine. The air is piercing there,

And quick; it sharps the stomach. Come, Leonine,

Take her by th’ arm. Walk with her.

MARINA No, I pray you,

I’ll not bereave you of your servant.

DIONYZA Come, come,

I love the King your father and yourself

With more than foreign heart. We ev’ry day

Expect him here. When he shall come and find

Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,

He will repent the breadth of his great voyage,

Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken

No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,

Walk and be cheerful once again; resume

That excellent complexion which did steal

The eyes of young and old. Care not for me.

I can go home alone.

MARINA Well, I will go,

But truly I have no desire to it.

DIONYZA

Nay, I know ’tis good for you. Walk half an hour,

Leonine, at the least; remember

What I have said.

LEONINE I warr’nt you, madam.

DIONYZA (to Marina)

I’ll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while.

Pray you walk softly, do not heat your blood.

What, I must have care of you!

MARINA My thanks, sweet madam.

Exit Dionyza





Is this wind westerly that blows?

LEONINE South-west.

MARINA

When I was born the wind was north.

LEONINE Was’t SO? MARINA

My father, as nurse says, did never fear,

But cried ’Good seamen’ to the mariners,

Galling his kingly hands with haling ropes,

And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea

That almost burst the deck.

LEONINE When was this?

MARINA When I was born.

Never was waves nor wind more violent.

Once from the ladder tackle washes off

A canvas-climber. ‘Ha!’ says one, ‘wolt out?’

And with a dropping industry they skip

From stem to stern. The boatswain whistles, and

The master calls and trebles their confusion.

LEONINE Come, say your prayers.

MARINA What mean you?

LEONINE

If you require a little space for prayer

I grant it. Pray, but be not tedious.

The gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn

To do my work with haste.

MARINA Why would you kill me?

LEONINE

To satisfy my lady.

MARINA

Why would she have me killed? Now, as I can remember, by my troth

I never did her hurt in all my life.

I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn

To any living creature. Believe me, la.

I never killed a mouse nor hurt a fly.

I trod once on a worm against my will,

But I wept for it. How have I offended

Wherein my death might yield her any profit

Or my life imply her danger?

LEONINE My commission

Is not to reason of the deed, but do’t.

MARINA

You will not do’t for all the world, I hope.

You are well favoured, and your looks foreshow

You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately

When you caught hurt in parting two that fought.

Good sooth, it showed well in you. Do so now.

Your lady seeks my life. Come you between,

And save poor me, the weaker.

LEONINE ⌈drawing out his sword⌉ I am sworn,

And will dispatch.

Enter Pirates ⌈running⌉





FIRST PIRATE Hold, villain.

Leonine runs away ⌈and hides behind the tomb⌉





SECOND PIRATE A prize, a prize.

THIRD PIRATE Half-part, mates, half-part. Come, let’s have her aboard suddenly.

Exeunt Pirates ⌈carrying⌉ Marina



Leonine ⌈steals back⌉





LEONINE

These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes.

An they have seized Marina, let her go.

There’s no hope she’ll return. I’ll swear she’s dead

And thrown into the sea; but I’ll see further.

Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,

Not carry her aboard. If she remain,

Whom they have ravished must by me be slain.

Exit. ⌈The tomb is concealed⌉





Sc. 16 ⌈A brothel sign.] Enter the Pander, his wife the Bawd, and their man Boult



PANDER Boult.

BOULT Sir.

PANDER Search the market narrowly. Mytilene is full of gallants. We lose too much money this mart by being wenchless.

BAWD We were never so much out of creatures. We have but poor three, and they can do no more than they can do, and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.

PANDER Therefore let’s have fresh ones, whate’er we pay for them. If there be not a conscience to be used in every trade, we shall never prosper.

BAWD Thou sayst true. ’Tis not our bringing up of poor bastards—as I think I have brought up some eleven—

BOULT Ay, to eleven, and brought them down again. But shall I search the market?

BAWD What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.

PANDER Thou sayst true. They’re too unwholesome, o’ conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead that lay with the little baggage.

BOULT Ay, she quickly pooped him, she made him roast meat for worms. But I’ll go search the market. Exit

PANDER Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a proportion to live quietly, and so give over.

BAWD Why to give over, I pray you? Is it a shame to get when we are old?

PANDER O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor the commodity wages not with the danger. Therefore if in our youths we could pick up some pretty estate, ‘twere not amiss to keep our door hatched. Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving o’er.

BAWD Come, other sorts offend as well as we. PANDER As well as we? Ay, and better too; we offend worse. Neither is our profession any mystery, it’s no calling. But here comes Boult.

Enter Boult with the Pirates and Marina





BOULT ⌈to the Pirates⌉ Come your ways, my masters, you say she’s a virgin?

A PIRATE O sir, we doubt it not.

BOULT (to Pander) Master, I have gone through for this piece you see. If you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.

BAWD Boult, has she any qualities?

BOULT She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent good clothes. There’s no farther necessity of qualities can make her be refused.

BAWD What’s her price, Boult?

BOULT I cannot be bated one doit of a hundred sesterces.

PANDER (to Pirates) Well, follow me, my masters. You shall have your money presently. (To Bawd) Wife, take her in, instruct her what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her entertainment.

Exeunt Pander and Pirates





BAWD Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her hair, complexion, height, her age, with warrant of her virginity, and cry ‘He that will give most shall have her first.’ Such a maidenhead were no cheap thing if men were as they have been. Get this done as I command you.

BOULT Performance shall follow. Exit

MARINA

Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow.

He should have struck, not spoke; or that these pirates,

Not enough barbarous, had but o’erboard thrown me

To seek my mother.

BAWD Why lament you, pretty one?

MARINA That I am pretty.

BAWD Come, the gods have done their part in you.

MARINA I accuse them not.

BAWD You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.

MARINA The more my fault

To scape his hands where I was like to die.

BAWD Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.

MARINA No.

BAWD Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all fashions. You shall fare well. You shall have the difference of all complexions. What, do you stop your ears?

MARINA Are you a woman?

BAWD What would you have me be an I be not a woman?

MARINA

An honest woman, or not a woman.

BAWD Marry, whip the gosling! I think I shall have something to do with you. Come, you’re a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have you.

MARINA The gods defend me!

BAWD If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir you up.

Enter Boult





Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market? BOULT I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs.

I have drawn her picture with my voice.

BAWD And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?

BOULT Faith, they listened to me as they would have hearkened to their fathers’ testament. There was a Spaniard’s mouth watered as he went to bed to her very description.

BAWD We shall have him here tomorrow with his best ruff on.

BOULT Tonight, tonight. But mistress, do you know the French knight that cowers i’ the hams?

BAWD Who, Monsieur Veroles?

BOULT Ay, he. He offered to cut a caper at the proclamation, but he made a groan at it, and swore he would see her tomorrow.

BAWD Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease hither. Here he does but repair it. I know he will come in our shadow to scatter his crowns of the sun.

BOULT Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we should lodge them all with this sign.

BAWD (to Marina) Pray you, come hither a while. You have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me, you must seem to do that fearfully which you commit willingly, to despise profit where you have most gain. To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your lovers. Seldom but that pity begets you a good opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.

MARINA I understand you not.

BOULT (to Bawd) O, take her home, mistress, take her home. These blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practice.

BAWD Thou sayst true, i’faith, so they must, for your bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go with warrant.

BOULT Faith, some do and some do not. But mistress, if I have bargained for the joint—

BAWD Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.

BOULT I may so.

BAWD Who should deny it? (To Marina) Come, young one, I like the manner of your garments well.

BOULT Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.

BAWD (giving him money) Boult, spend thou that in the town. Report what a sojourner we have. You’ll lose nothing by custom. When nature framed this piece she meant thee a good turn. Therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou reapest the harvest out of thine own setting forth.

BOULT I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stirs up the lewdly inclined. I’ll bring home some tonight.

⌈Exit⌉





BAWD Come your ways, follow me.

MARINA

If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,

Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.

Diana aid my purpose.

BAWD What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with me?

Exeunt. ⌈The sign is removed⌉





Sc. 17 Enter ⌈in mourning garments⌉ Cleon and Dionyza DIONYZA



Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?

CLEON

O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughter

The sun and moon ne’er looked upon.

DIONYZA

I think you’ll turn a child again.

CLEON

Were I chief lord of all this spacious world

I’d give it to undo the deed. A lady

Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess

To equal any single crown o‘th’ earth

I’th’ justice of compare. O villain Leonine,

Whom thou hast poisoned too,

If thou hadst drunk to him ‘t’ad been a kindness

Becoming well thy fact. What canst thou say

When noble Pericles demands his child?

DIONYZA

That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates.

To foster is not ever to preserve.

She died at night. I’ll say so. Who can cross it,

Unless you play the pious innocent

And, for an honest attribute, cry out

‘She died by foul play.’

CLEON O, go to. Well, well,

Of all the faults beneath the heav’ns the gods

Do like this worst.

DIONYZA Be one of those that thinks

The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence

And open this to Pericles. I do shame

To think of what a noble strain you are,

And of how cowed a spirit.

CLEON To such proceeding

Whoever but his approbation added,

Though not his prime consent, he did not flow

From honourable sources.

DIONYZA Be it so, then.

Yet none does know but you how she came dead,

Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.

She did distain my child, and stood between

Her and her fortunes. None would look on her,

But cast their gazes on Marina’s face

Whilst ours was blurted at, and held a malkin

Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through,

And though you call my course unnatural,

You not your child well loving, yet I find

It greets me as an enterprise of kindness

Performed to your sole daughter.

CLEON Heavens forgive it.

DIONYZA And as for Pericles,

What should he say? We wept after her hearse,

And yet we mourn. Her monument

Is almost finished, and her epitaphs

In glitt‘ring golden characters express

A gen’ral praise to her and care in us,

At whose expense ’tis done.

CLEON Thou art like the harpy, Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel face, Seize in thine eagle talons.

DIONYZA

Ye’re like one that superstitiously

Do swear to th’ gods that winter kills the flies,

But yet I know you’ll do as I advise. Exeunt





Sc. 18 Enter Gower



GOWER

Thus time we waste, and long leagues make we short,

Sail seas in cockles, have and wish but for‘t,

Making to take imagination

From bourn to bourn, region to region.

By you being pardoned, we commit no crime

To use one language in each sev’ral clime

Where our scene seems to live. I do beseech you

To learn of me, who stand i’th’ gaps to teach you

The stages of our story: Pericles

Is now again thwarting the wayward seas,

Attended on by many a lord and knight,

To see his daughter, all his life’s delight.

Old Helicanus goes along. Behind

Is left to govern, if you bear in mind,

Old Aeschines, whom Helicanus late

Advanced in Tyre to great and high estate.

Well sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought

This king to Tarsus—think his pilot thought;

So with his steerage shall your thoughts go on—

To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone.

Like motes and shadows see them move a while;

Your ears unto your eyes I’ll reconcile.

Dumb show.



Enter Pericles at one door with all his train, Cleon

and Dionyza ⌈in mourning garments⌉ at the other.

Cleon ⌈draws the curtain and⌉ shows Pericles the

tomb, whereat Pericles makes lamentation, puts on

sack-cloth, and in a mighty passion departs,

followed by his train. Cleon and Dionyza depart at

the other door





See how belief may suffer by foul show.

This borrowed passion stands for true-owed woe,

And Pericles, in sorrow all devoured,

With sighs shot through, and biggest tears o‘ershow’red,

Leaves Tarsus, and again embarks. He swears

Never to wash his face nor cut his hairs.

He puts on sack-cloth, and to sea. He bears

A tempest which his mortal vessel tears,

And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit

The epitaph is for Marina writ

By wicked Dionyza.

He reads Marina’s epitaph on the tomb



‘The fairest, sweetest, best lies here,

Who withered in her spring of year.

In nature’s garden, though by growth a bud,

She was the chiefest flower: she was good.’





No visor does become black villainy

So well as soft and tender flattery.

Let Pericles believe his daughter’s dead

And bear his courses to be ordered

By Lady Fortune, while our scene must play

His daughter’s woe and heavy well-a-day

In her unholy service. Patience then,

And think you now are all in Mytilene. Exit





Sc. 19 ⌈A brothel sign.⌉ Enter two Gentlemen



FIRST GENTLEMAN Did you ever hear the like?

SECOND GENTLEMAN No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she being once gone.

FIRST GENTLEMAN But to have divinity preached there—did you ever dream of such a thing?

SECOND GENTLEMAN No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy houses. Shall ’s go hear the vestals sing?

FIRST GENTLEMAN I’ll do anything now that is virtuous, but I am out of the road of rutting for ever. Exeunt

Enter Pander, Bawd, and Boult





PANDER Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she had ne’er come here.

BAWD Fie, fie upon her, she’s able to freeze the god Priapus and undo the whole of generation. We must either get her ravished or be rid of her. When she should do for clients her fitment and do me the kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks, her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her knees, that she would make a puritan of the devil if he should cheapen a kiss of her.

BOULT Faith, I must ravish her, or she’ll disfurnish us of all our cavalleria and make our swearers priests.

PANDER Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me. BAWD Faith, there’s no way to be rid on’t but by the way to the pox.

Enter Lysimachus, disguised





Here comes the Lord Lysimachus, disguised.

BOULT We should have both lord and loon if the peevish baggage would but give way to custom.

LYSIMACHUS How now, how a dozen of virginities? BAWD Now, the gods to-bless your honour!

BOULT I am glad to see your honour in good health.

LYSIMACHUS You may so. ’Tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs. How now, wholesome iniquity have you, that a man may deal withal and defy the surgeon?

BAWD We have here one, sir, if she woutd—but there never came her like in Mytilene.

LYSIMACHUS If she’d do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.

BAWD Your honour knows what ’tis to say well enough. LYSIMACHUS Well, call forth, call forth. ⌈Exit Pander⌉ BOULT For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall see a rose. And she were a rose indeed, if she had but—

LYSIMACHUS What, prithee?

BOULT O sir, I can be modest.

LYSIMACHUS That dignifies the renown of a bawd no less than it gives a good report to a noble to be chaste.

⌈Enter Pander with Marina⌉





BAWD Here comes that which grows to the stalk, never plucked yet, I can assure you. Is she not a fair creature?

LYSIMACHUS Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea. Well, there’s for you. Leave us.

⌈He pays the Bawd⌉





BAWD I beseech your honour give me leave: a word, and I’ll have done presently.

LYSIMACHUS I beseech you, do.

BAWD (aside to Marina) First, I would have you note this is an honourable man.

MARINA I desire to find him so, that I may honourably know him.

BAWD Next, he’s the governor of this country, and a man whom I am bound to.

MARINA If he govern the country you are bound to him indeed, but how honourable he is in that, I know not.

BAWD Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.

MARINA What he will do graciously I will thankfully receive. LYSIMACHUS (to Bawd) Ha’ you done?

BAWD My lord, she’s not paced yet. You must take some pains to work her to your manège. (To Boult and Pander) Come, we will leave his honour and hers together. Go thy ways. Exeunt Pander, Bawd, and Boult

LYSIMACHUS

Fair one, how long have you been at this trade? MARINA What trade, sir?

LYSIMACHUS

I cannot name it but I shall offend.

MARINA

I cannot be offended with my trade.

Please you to name it.

LYSIMACHUS How long have you been

Of this profession?

MARINA E’er since I can remember.

LYSIMACHUS

Did you go to’t so young? Were you a gamester

At five, or seven?

MARINA Earlier too, sir,

If now I be one.

LYSIMACHUS Why, the house you dwell in

Proclaimeth you a creature of sale.

MARINA

And do you know this house to be a place

Of such resort and will come into it?

I hear say you’re of honourable blood,

And are the governor of this whole province.

LYSIMACHUS

What, hath your principal informed you who I am?

MARINA

Who is my principal?

LYSIMACHUS Why, your herb-woman;

She that sets seeds of shame, roots of iniquity.

⌈Marina weeps⌉





O, you’ve heard something of my pow‘r, and so

Stand off aloof for a more serious wooing.

But I protest to thee,

Pretty one, my authority can wink

At blemishes, or can on faults look friendly;

Or my displeasure punish at my pleasure,

From which displeasure, not thy beauty shall

Privilege thee, nor my affection, which

Hath drawn me here, abate with further ling’ring.

Come bring me to some private place. Come, come.

MARINA

Let not authority, which teaches you

To govern others, be the means to make you

Misgovern much yourself.

If you were born to honour, show it now;

If put upon you, make the judgement good

That thought you worthy of it. What reason’s in

Your justice, who hath power over all,

To undo any? If you take from me

Mine honour, you’re like him that makes a gap

Into forbidden ground, whom after

Too many enter, and of all their evils

Yourself are guilty. My life is yet unspotted;

My chastity unstained ev’n in thought.

Then if your violence deface this building,

The workmanship of heav‘n, you do kill your honour,

Abuse your justice, and impoverish me.

My yet good lord, if there be fire before me,

Must I straight fly and burn myself? Suppose this

house—

Which too too many feel such houses are—

Should be the doctor’s patrimony, and

The surgeon’s feeding; follows it, that I

Must needs infect myself to give them maint’nance?

LYSIMACHUS

How’s this, how’s this? Some more. Be sage.

MARINA ⌈kneeling⌉ For me

That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune

Have franked me in this sty, where since I came

Diseases have been sold dearer than physic—

That the gods would set me free from this unhallowed

place,

Though they did change me to the meanest bird

That flies i’th’ purer air!

LYSIMACHUS ⌈moved⌉ I did not think

Thou couldst have spoke so well, ne’er dreamt thou

couldst.

⌈He lifts her up with his hands⌉

Though I brought hither a corrupted mind,

Thy speech hath altered it,

⌈He wipes the wet from her eyes⌉ and my foul thoughts



Thy tears so well hath laved that they’re now white.

I came here meaning but to pay the price,

A piece of gold for thy virginity;

Here’s twenty to relieve thine honesty.

Persever still in that clear way thou goest,

And the gods strengthen thee.

MARINA The good gods preserve you!

LYSIMACHUS

The very doors and windows savour vilely.

Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue,

The best wrought up that ever nature made,

And I doubt not thy training hath been noble.

A curse upon him, die he like a thief,

That robs thee of thy honour. Hold, here’s more gold.

If thou dost hear from me, it shall be for thy good.

⌈Enter Boult standing ready at the door, making his obeisance unto him as Lysimachus should go out⌉





BOULT I beseech your honour, one piece for me.

LYSIMACHUS

Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!

Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,

Would sink and overwhelm you. Away. Exit

BOULT How’s this? We must take another course with you. If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope, shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like a spaniel. Come your ways.

MARINA Whither would you have me?

BOULT I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common executioner shall do it. We’ll have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.

Enter Bawd and Pander





BAWD How now, what’s the matter?

BOULT Worse and worse, mistress, she has here spoken holy words to the Lord Lysimachus.

BAWD O, abominable!

BOULT She makes our profession as it were to stink afore the face of the gods.

BAWD Marry hang her up for ever!

BOULT The nobleman would have dealt with her like a nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a snowball, saying his prayers, too.

⌈PANDER⌉ Boult, take her away. Use her at thy pleasure. Crack the ice of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.

BOULT An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she is, she shall be ploughed.

MARINA Hark, hark, you gods!

BAWD She conjures. Away with her! Would she had never come within my doors.—Marry, hang you!—She’s born to undo us.—Will you not go the way of womenkind? Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays. Exeunt Bawd and Pander

BOULT ⌈catching her rashly by the hand⌉ Come, mistress, come your way with me.

MARINA Whither wilt thou have me?

BOULT To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.

MARINA Prithee, tell me one thing first.

BOULT Come, now, your one thing.

MARINA

What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?

BOULT Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather my mistress.

MARINA

Neither of these can be so bad as thou art,

Since they do better thee in their command.

Thou hold‘st a place the painèd’st fiend of hell

Would not in reputation change with thee,

Thou damned doorkeeper to ev‘ry coistrel

That comes enquiring for his Tib.

To th’ choleric fisting of ev’ry rogue

Thy ear is liable. Thy food is such

As hath been belched on by infected lungs.

BOULT What would you have me do? Go to the wars, would you, where a man may serve seven years for the loss of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one?

MARINA

Do anything but this thou dost. Empty

Old receptacles or common sew’rs of filth,

Serve by indenture to the public hangman—

Any of these are yet better than this.

For what thou professest a baboon, could he speak,

Would own a name too dear. Here’s gold for thee.

If that thy master would make gain by me,

Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,

With other virtues which I’ll keep from boast,

And I will undertake all these to teach.

I doubt not but this populous city will

Yield many scholars.

BOULT But can you teach all this you speak of?

MARINA

Prove that I cannot, take me home again

And prostitute me to the basest groom

That doth frequent your house.

BOULT Well, I will see what I can do for thee. If I can place thee, I will.

MARINA But amongst honest women.

BOULT Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them; but since my master and mistress hath bought you, there’s no going but by their consent. Therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough. Come, I’ll do for thee what I can. Come your ways.

Exeunt. ⌈The sign is removed⌉





Sc. 20 Enter Gower



GOWER

Marina thus the brothel scapes, and chances

Into an honest house, our story says.

She sings like one immortal, and she dances

As goddess-like to her admired lays.

Deep clerks she dumbs, and with her nee‘le composes

Nature’s own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry,

That e’en her art sisters the natural roses.

Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry;

That pupils lacks she none of noble race,

Who pour their bounty on her, and her gain

She gives the cursed Bawd. Here we her place,

And to her father turn our thoughts again.

We left him on the sea. Waves there him tossed,

Whence, driven tofore the winds, he is arrived

Here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast

Suppose him now at anchor. The city strived

God Neptune’s annual feast to keep, from whence

Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies,

His banners sable, trimmed with rich expense;

And to him in his barge with fervour hies.

In your supposing once more put your sight;

Of heavy Pericles think this the barque,

Where what is done in action, more if might,

Shall be discovered. Please you sit and hark. Exit





Sc. 21 Enter Helicanus ⌈above; below, enter⌉ to him at the first door two Sailors, ⌈one of Tyre, the other of Mytilene⌉



SAILOR OF TYRE (to Sailor of Mytilene)

Lord Helicanus can resolve you, sir.

(To Helicanus) There is a barge put off from Mytilene.

In it, Lysimachus, the governor,

Who craves to come aboard. What is your will?

HELICANUS

That he have his.

⌈Exit Sailor of Mytilene at first door⌉ Call up some gentlemen.



⌈Exit Helicanus above⌉





⌈SAILOR OF TYRE⌉

Ho, my lord calls!

Enter ⌈from below the stage⌉ two or three Gentlemen; ⌈to them, enter Helicanus⌉





FIRST GENTLEMAN What is your lordship’s pleasure?

HELICANUS

Gentlemen, some of worth would come aboard.

I pray you, greet him fairly.

Enter Lysimachus ⌈at first door, with the Sailor and Lords of Mytilene⌉





⌈SAILOR OF MYTILENE⌉ (to Lysimachus)

This is the man that can in aught resolve you.

LYSIMACHUS (to Helicanus)

Hail, reverend sir; the gods preserve you!

HELICANUS

And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,

And die as I would do.

LYSIMACHUS You wish me well.

I am the governor of Mytilene;

Being on shore, honouring of Neptune’s triumphs,

Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,

I made to it to know of whence you are.

HELICANUS

Our vessel is of Tyre, in it our king,

A man who for this three months hath not spoken

To anyone, nor taken sustenance

But to prorogue his grief.

LYSIMACHUS

Upon what ground grew his distemp’rature?

HELICANUS

’Twould be too tedious to tell it over,

But the main grief springs from the precious loss

Of a belovèd daughter and a wife.

LYSIMACHUS

May we not see him?

HELICANUS

See him, sir, you may,

But bootless is your sight. He will not speak

To any.

LYSIMACHUS Let me yet obtain my wish.

HELICANUS

Behold him.

Helicanus draws a curtain, revealing Pericles lying upon a couch with a long overgrown beard, diffused hair, undecent nails on his fingers, and attired in sack-cloth





This was a goodly person

Till the disaster of one mortal night

Drove him to this.

LYSIMACHUS (to Pericles)

Sir, King, all hail. Hail, royal sir.

⌈Pericles shrinks himself down upon his pillow⌉





HELICANUS

It is in vain. He will not speak to you.

LORD OF MYTILENE

Sir, we have a maid in Mytilene I durst wager

Would win some words of him.

LYSIMACHUS ’Tis well bethought.

She questionless, with her sweet harmony

And other choice attractions, would alarum

And make a batt‘ry through his deafened ports,

Which now are midway stopped. She in all happy,

As the fair’st of all, among her fellow maids

Dwells now i’th’ leafy shelter that abuts

Against the island’s side. Go fetch her hither.

⌈Exit Lord⌉





HELICANUS

Sure, all effectless; yet nothing we’ll omit

That bears recov’ry’s name. But since your kindness

We have stretched thus far, let us beseech you

That for our gold we may provision have,

Wherein we are not destitute for want,

But weary for the staleness.

LYSIMACHUS O sir, a courtesy

Which if we should deny, the most just gods

For every graft would send a caterpillar,

And so inflict our province. Yet once more

Let me entreat to know at large the cause

Of your king’s sorrow.

HELICANUS Sit, sir. I will recount it.

⌈Enter Lord with Marina and another maid⌉





But see, I am prevented.

LYSIMACHUS

O, here’s the lady that I sent for.—

Welcome, fair one.—Is’t not a goodly presence? HELICANUS She’s a gallant lady.

LYSIMACHUS

She’s such a one that, were I well assured

Came of gentle kind or noble stock, I’d wish

No better choice to think me rarely wed.—

Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty

Expect e’en here, where is a kingly patient;

If that thy prosperous and artificial feat

Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,

Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay

As thy desires can wish.

MARINA Sir, I will use

My utmost skill in his recure, provided

That none but I and my companion maid

Be suffered to come near him.

LYSIMACHUS (to the others) Let us leave her,

And the gods prosper her. ⌈The men stand aside⌉

The Song





LYSIMACHUS ⌈coming forward⌉ Marked he your music? ⌈MAID⌉

No, nor looked on us.

LYSIMACHUS (to the others) See, she will speak to him.

MARINA (to Pericles)

Hail, sir; my lord, lend ear.

PERICLES Hmh, ha!

⌈He roughly repulses her⌉





MARINA I am a maid,

My lord, that ne‘er before invited eyes,

But have been gazed on like a comet. She speaks,

My lord, that maybe hath endured a grief

Might equal yours, if both were justly weighed.

Though wayward fortune did malign my state,

My derivation was from ancestors

Who stood equivalent with mighty kings,

But time hath rooted out my parentage,

And to the world and awkward casualties

Bound me in servitude. (Aside) I will desist.

But there is something glows upon my cheek,

And whispers in mine ear ‘Stay till he speak.’

PERICLES

My fortunes, parentage, good parentage,

To equal mine? Was it not thus? What say you?

MARINA

I said if you did know my parentage,

My lord, you would not do me violence.

PERICLES

I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me.

You’re like something that—what countrywoman?

Here of these shores?

MARINA No, nor of any shores,

Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am

No other than I seem.

PERICLES ⌈aside⌉

I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.

My dearest wife was like this maid, and such

My daughter might have been. My queen’s square

brows,

Her stature to an inch, as wand-like straight,

As silver-voiced, her eyes as jewel-like,

And cased as richly, in pace another Juno,

Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them

hungry

The more she gives them speech.—Where do you live?

MARINA

Where I am but a stranger. From the deck

You may discern the place.

PERICLES

Where were you bred, And how achieved you these endowments which You make more rich to owe?

MARINA If I should tell My history, it would seem like lies Disdained in the reporting.

PERICLES Prithee speak.

Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou look‘st

Modest as justice, and thou seem’st a palace

For the crowned truth to dwell in. I will believe thee,

And make my senses credit thy relation

To points that seem impossible. Thou show‘st

Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?

Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back—

Which was when I perceived thee—that thou cam’st

From good descending?

MARINA So indeed I did.

PERICLES

Report thy parentage. I think thou said‘st

Thou hadst been tossed from wrong to injury,

And that thou thought’st thy griefs might equal mine,

If both were opened.

MARINA Some such thing I said,

And said no more but what my circumstance

Did warrant me was likely.

PERICLES Tell thy story.

If thine considered prove the thousandth part

Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I

Have suffered like a girl. Yet thou dost look

Like patience gazing on kings’ graves, and smiling

Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?

How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin?

Recount, I do beseech thee. Come, sit by me.

She sits





MARINA

My name, sir, is Marina.

PERICLES

O, I am mocked,

And thou by some incensed god sent hither

To make the world to laugh at me.

MARINA Patience, good sir,

Or here I’ll cease.

PERICLES

Nay, I’ll be patient.

Thou little know’st how thou dost startle me

To call thyself Marina.

MARINA

The name

Was given me by one that had some power:

My father, and a king.

PERICLES

How, a king’s daughter, And called Marina?

MARINA

You said you would believe me, But not to be a troubler of your peace I will end here.

PERICLES

But are you flesh and blood?

Have you a working pulse and are no fairy?

Motion as well? Speak on. Where were you born,

And wherefore called Marina?

MARINA

Called Marina

For I was born at sea.

PERICLES At sea? What mother?

MARINA

My mother was the daughter of a king,

Who died when I was born, as my good nurse

Lychorida hath oft recounted weeping.

PERICLES

O, stop there a little! ⌈Aside⌉ This is the rarest dream

That e’er dulled sleep did mock sad fools withal.

This cannot be my daughter, buried. Well.

(To Marina) Where were you bred? I’ll hear you more

to th’ bottom

Of your story, and never interrupt you.

MARINA

You will scarce believe me. ‘Twere best I did give o’er.

PERICLES

I will believe you by the syllable

Of what you shall deliver. Yet give me leave.

How came you in these parts? Where were you bred?

MARINA

The King my father did in Tarsus leave me,

Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife,

Did seek to murder me, and wooed a villain

To attempt the deed; who having drawn to do’t,

A crew of pirates came and rescued me.

To Mytilene they brought me. But, good sir,

What will you of me? Why do you weep? It may be

You think me an impostor. No, good faith,

I am the daughter to King Pericles,

If good King Pericles be.

PERICLES rising Ho, Helicanus!

HELICANUS (coming forward) Calls my lord?

PERICLES

Thou art a grave and noble counsellor,

Most wise in gen’ral. Tell me if thou canst

What this maid is, or what is like to be,

That thus hath made me weep.

HELICANUS

I know not.

But here’s the regent, sir, of Mytilene

Speaks nobly of her.

LYSIMACHUS She would never tell

Her parentage. Being demanded that,

She would sit still and weep.

PERICLES

O Helicanus, strike me, honoured sir,

Give me a gash, put me to present pain,

Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me

O‘erbear the shores of my mortality

And drown me with their sweetness! (To Marina) O,

come hither,

⌈Marina stands⌉





Thou that begett’st him that did thee beget,

Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,

And found at sea again!—O Helicanus,

Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud

As thunder threatens us, this is Marina!

(To Marina) What was thy mother’s name? Tell me

but that,

For truth can never be confirmed enough,

Though doubts did ever sleep.

MARINA First, sir, I pray, What is your title?

PERICLES I am Pericles

Of Tyre. But tell me now my drowned queen’s name.

As in the rest thou hast been godlike perfect,

So prove but true in that, thou art my daughter,

The heir of kingdoms, and another life

To Pericles thy father.

MARINA ⌈kneeling⌉ Is it no more

To be your daughter than to say my mother’s name?

Thaisa was my mother, who did end

The minute I began.

PERICLES

Now blessing on thee! Rise. Thou art my child.

⌈Marina stands. He kisses her⌉





⌈To attendants⌉ Give me fresh garments.—Mine own,

Helicanus!

Not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been

By savage Cleon. She shall tell thee all,

When thou shalt kneel and justify in knowledge

She is thy very princess. Who is this?

HELICANUS

Sir, ’tis the governor of Mytilene,

Who, hearing of your melancholy state,

Did come to see you.

PERICLES (to Lysimachus) I embrace you, sir.—

Give me my robes.

⌈He is attired in fresh robes⌉





I am wild in my beholding.

O heavens, bless my girl!

⌈Celestial music⌉





But hark, what music?

Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him

O’er point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,

How sure you are my daughter. But what music?

HELICANUS My lord, I hear none.

PERICLES

None? The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.

LYSIMACHUS (aside to the others)

It is not good to cross him. Give him way.

PERICLES Rar’st sounds. Do ye not hear?

LYSIMACHUS Music, my lord?

PERICLES I hear most heav’nly music.

It raps me unto list’ning, and thick slumber

Hangs upon mine eyelids. Let me rest.

He sleeps





LYSIMACHUS

A pillow for his head.

⌈To Marina and others⌉ Companion friends,

If this but answer to my just belief

I’ll well remember you. So leave him all.

Exeunt all but Pericles



Diana ⌈descends from the heavens⌉





DIANA

My temple stands in Ephesus. Hie thee thither,

And do upon mine altar sacrifice.

There when my maiden priests are met together,

At large discourse thy fortunes in this wise:

With a full voice before the people all,

Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife.

To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter‘s, call

And give them repetition to the life.

Perform my bidding, or thou liv’st in woe;

Do’t, and rest happy, by my silver bow.

Awake, and tell thy dream.

⌈Diana ascends into the heavens⌉





PERICLES

Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,

I will obey thee. (Calling) Helicanus!

Enter Helicanus, Lysimachus, and Marina





HELICANUS Sir?

PERICLES

My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike

Th’inhospitable Cleon, but I am

For other service first. Toward Ephesus

Turn our blown sails. Eftsoons I’ll tell thee why.

Exit Helicanus



Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,

And give you gold for such provision

As our intents will need?

LYSIMACHUS

With all my heart, sir,

And when you come ashore I have a suit.

PERICLES

You shall prevail, were it to woo my daughter,

For it seems you have been noble towards her.

LYSIMACHUS

Sir, lend me your arm.

PERICLES

Come, my Marina.

⌈Exit Pericles with Lysimachus at one arm, Marina at the other⌉





Sc. 22 Enter Gower



GOWER

Now our sands are almost run;

More a little, and then dumb.

This my last boon give me,

For such kindness must relieve me,

That you aptly will suppose

What pageantry, what feats, what shows,

What minstrelsy and pretty din

The regent made in Mytilene

To greet the King. So well he thrived

That he is promised to be wived

To fair Marina, but in no wise

Till he had done his sacrifice

As Dian bade, whereto being bound

The int’rim, pray you, all confound.

In feathered briefness sails are filled,

And wishes fall out as they’re willed.

At Ephesus the temple see:

⌈An altar, Thaisa and other vestals are revealed⌉



Our king, and all his company.

⌈Enter Pericles, Marina, Lysimachus, Helicanus, Cerimon, with attendants⌉



That he can hither come so soon

Is by your fancies’ thankful doom.

⌈Gower stands aside⌉





PERICLES

Hail, Dian. To perform thy just command

I here confess myself the King of Tyre,

Who, frighted from my country, did espouse

The fair Thaisa

⌈Thaisa starts⌉





at Pentapolis.

At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth

A maid child called Marina, who, O goddess,

Wears yet thy silver liv‘ry. She at Tarsus

Was nursed with Cleon, whom at fourteen years

He sought to murder, but her better stars

Bore her to Mytilene, ’gainst whose shore riding

Her fortunes brought the maid aboard our barque,

Where, by her own most clear remembrance, she

Made known herself my daughter.

THAISA

Voice and favour—

You are, you are—O royal Pericles! She falls





PERICLES

What means the nun? She dies. Help, gentlemen!

CERIMON Noble sir,

If you have told Diana’s altar true,

This is your wife.

PERICLES Reverend appearer, no.

I threw her overboard with these same arms.

CERIMON

Upon this coast, I warr’nt you.

PERICLES ’Tis most certain.

CERIMON

Look to the lady. O, she’s but o’erjoyed.

Early one blustering morn this lady

Was thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,

Found there rich jewels, recovered her, and placed her

Here in Diana’s temple.

PERICLES May we see them?

CERIMON

Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,

Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is

Recovered.

THAISA O, let me look upon him!

If he be none of mine, my sanctity

Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,

But curb it, spite of seeing. O, my lord,

Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,

Like him you are. Did you not name a tempest,

A birth and death?

PERICLES The voice of dead Thaisa! THAISA That Thaisa

Am I, supposed dead and drowned.

PERICLES ⌈taking Thaisa’s hand⌉ Immortal Dian!

THAISA Now I know you better.

When we with tears parted Pentapolis,

The King my father gave you such a ring.

PERICLES

This, this! No more, you gods. Your present kindness

Makes my past miseries sports; you shall do well

That on the touching of her lips I may

Melt, and no more be seen.—O come, be buried

A second time within these arms.

⌈They embrace and kiss⌉





MARINA (kneeling to Thaisa) My heart Leaps to be gone into my mother’s bosom.

PERICLES

Look who kneels here: flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa,

Thy burden at the sea, and called Marina

For she was yielded there.

THAISA ⌈embracing Marina⌉ Blessed, and mine own! HELICANUS ⌈kneeling to Thaisa⌉

Hail, madam, and my queen.

THAISA I know you not.

PERICLES

You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre,

I left behind an ancient substitute.

Can you remember what I called the man?

I have named him oft.

THAISA ’Twas Helicanus then.

PERICLES Still confirmation.

Embrace him, dear Thaisa; this is he.

Now do I long to hear how you were found,

How possibly preserved, and who to thank—

Besides the gods—for this great miracle.

THAISA

Lord Cerimon, my lord. This is the man

Through whom the gods have shown their pow’r,

that can

From first to last resolve you.

PERICLES (to Cerimon) Reverend sir,

The gods can have no mortal officer

More like a god than you. Will you deliver

How this dead queen re-lives?

CERIMON I will, my lord.

Beseech you, first go with me to my house,

Where shall be shown you all was found with her,

And told how in this temple she came placed,

No needful thing omitted.

PERICLES

Pure Diana,

I bless thee for thy vision, and will offer

Nightly oblations to thee.—Beloved Thaisa,

This prince, the fair betrothed of your daughter,

At Pentapolis shall marry her.

(To Marina) And now this ornament

Makes me look dismal will I clip to form,

And what this fourteen years no razor touched,

To grace thy marriage day I’ll beautify.

THAISA

Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit,

Sir, from Pentapolis: my father’s dead.

PERICLES

Heav’n make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,

We’ll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves

Will in that kingdom spend our following days.

Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.—

Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay

To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead ’s the way.

Exeunt ⌈all but Gower⌉





GOWER

In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard

Of monstrous lust the due and just reward;

In Pericles, his queen, and daughter seen,

Although assailed with fortune fierce and keen,

Virtue preserved from fell destruction’s blast,

Led on by heav’n, and crowned with joy at last.

In Helicanus may you well descry

A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty.

In reverend Cerimon there well appears

The worth that learned charity aye wears.

For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame

Had spread their cursed deed to th’ honoured name

Of Pericles, to rage the city turn,

That him and his they in his palace burn.

The gods for murder seemed so content

To punish that, although not done, but meant.

So on your patience evermore attending,

New joy wait on you. Here our play has ending.

Exit





ADDITIONAL PASSAGES

Q gives this more expansive version of Marina’s Epitaph (18.347):

’The fairest, sweetest, best lies here,

Who withered in her spring of year.

She was of Tyrus the King’s daughter,

On whom foul death hath made this slaughter.

Marina was she called, and at her birth

Thetis, being proud, swallowed some part o‘th’ earth;

Therefore the earth, fearing to be o’erflowed,

Hath Thetis’ birth-child on the heav‘ns bestowed,

Wherefore she does, and swears she’ll never stint,

Make raging batt’ry upon shores of flint.’





