The Most Excellent and Lamentable Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet



Prologue Enter Chorus

CHORUS

Two households, both alike in dignity

In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,

From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,

Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.

From forth the fatal loins of these two foes

A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life,

Whose misadventured piteous overthrows

Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.

The fearful passage of their death-marked love

And the continuance of their parents’ rage—

Which but their children’s end, naught could remove—

Is now the two-hours’ traffic of our stage;

The which if you with patient ears attend,

What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

Exit





1.1 Enter Samson and Gregory, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers



SAMSON Gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals.

GREGORY No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMSON I mean an we be in choler, we’ll draw.

GREGORY Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.

SAMSON I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMSON A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand, therefore if thou art moved, thou runn’st away.

SAMSON A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.

GREGORY That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

SAMSON ’Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall; therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMSON ’Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the men I will be civil with the maids—I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY The heads of the maids?

SAMSON Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads, take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMSON Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, and ’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY ’Tis well thou art not fish. If thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.

Enter Abraham and another servingman of the Montagues





Draw thy tool. Here comes of the house of Montagues.

SAMSON My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY How—turn thy back and run?

SAMSON Fear me not.

GREGORY No, marry—I fear thee!

SAMSON Let us take the law of our side. Let them begin.

GREGORY I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

SAMSON Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it. He bites his thumb

ABRAHAM Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMSON I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAHAM Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMSON (to Gregory) Is the law of our side if I say ’Ay’ ?

GREGORY No.

SAMSON (to Abraham) No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY (to Abraham) Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAHAM Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMSON But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAHAM No better.

SAMSON Well, sir.

Enter Benvolio





GREGORY Say ‘better’. Here comes one of my master’s kinsmen.

SAMSON (to Abraham) Yes, better, sir.

ABRAHAM You lie.

SAMSON Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.

They draw and fight





BENVOLIO (drawing) Part, fools. Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

Enter Tybalt





TYBALT (drawing) What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? Turn thee, Benvolio. Look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO

I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT

What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word

As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.

Have at thee, coward.

They fight. Enter three or four Citizens ⌈of the watch⌉, with clubs or partisans





⌈CITIZENS OF THE WATCH⌉

Clubs, bills and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!

Down with the Capulets. Down with the Montagues.

Enter Capulet in his gown, and his Wife

CAPULET

What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

CAPULET’S WIFE

A crutch, a crutch—why call you for a sword?

Enter Montague ⌈With his sword drawn⌉, and his Wife





CAPULET

My sword, I say. Old Montague is come,

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE

Thou villain Capulet!

⌈His Wife holds him back⌉



Hold me not, let me go.





MONTAGUE’S WIFE

Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

⌈The Citizens of the watch attempt to part the factions.⌉



Enter Prince Escalus with his train





PRINCE

Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,

Profaners of this neighbour-stained steet—

Will they not hear? What ho, you men, you beasts,

That quench the fire of your pernicious rage

With purple fountains issuing from your veins:

On pain of torture, from those bloody hands

Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,

And hear the sentence of your moved Prince.

⌈Montague, Capulet, and their followers throw down their weapons]





Three civil brawls bred of an airy word

By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,

Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets

And made Verona’s ancient citizens

Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments

To wield old partisans in hands as old,

Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.

If ever you disturb our streets again

Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.

For this time all the rest depart away.

You, Capulet, shall go along with me;

And Montague, come you this afternoon

To know our farther pleasure in this case

To old Freetown, our common judgement-place.

Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

Exeunt all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio





MONTAGUE

Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?

Speak, nephew: were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO

Here were the servants of your adversary

And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.

I drew to part them. In the instant came

The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,

Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,

He swung about his head and cut the winds

Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.

While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,

Came more and more, and fought on part and part

Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

MONTAGUE’S WIFE

O where is Romeo—saw you him today?

Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO

Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun

Peered forth the golden window of the east,

A troubled mind drive me to walk abroad,

Where, underneath the grove of sycamore

That westward rooteth from this city side,

So early walking did I see your son.

Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,

And stole into the covert of the wood.

I, measuring his affections by my own—

Which then most sought where most might not be

found,

Being one too many by my weary self—

Pursued my humour not pursuing his,

And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE

Many a morning hath he there been seen,

With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew,

Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.

But all so soon as the all-cheering sun

Should in the farthest east begin to draw

The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed,

Away from light steals home my heavy son,

And private in his chamber pens himself,

Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,

And makes himself an artificial night.

Black and portentous must this humour prove,

Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO

My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE

I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO

Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE

Both by myself and many other friends,

But he, his own affection’s counsellor,

Is to himself—I will not say how true,

But to himself so secret and so close,

So far from sounding and discovery,

As is the bud bit with an envious worm

Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air

Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.

Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow

We would as willingly give cure as know.

Enter Romeo





BENVOLIO

See where he comes. So please you step aside,

I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE

I would thou wert so happy by thy stay

To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let’s away.

Exeunt Montague and his Wife





BENVOLIO

Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO

But new struck nine.

ROMEO Ay me, sad hours seem long.

Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO

It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?

ROMEO

Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO In love.

ROMEO Out.

BENVOLIO Of love?

ROMEO

Out of her favour where I am in love.

BENVOLIO

Alas that love, so gentle in his view,

Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.

ROMEO

Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,

Should without eyes see pathways to his will.

Where shall we dine? ⌈Seeing blood⌉ O me! What fray

was here?

Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.

Here’s much to do with hate, but more with love.

Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,

O anything of nothing first create;

O heavy lightness, serious vanity,

Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,

Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,

Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is I

This love feel I, that feel no love in this.

Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO

Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO At thy good heart’s oppression.

ROMEO Why, such is love’s transgression.

Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,

Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed

With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown

Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.

Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs,

Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes,

Being vexed, a sea nourished with lovers’ tears.

What is it else? A madness most discreet,

A choking gall and a preserving sweet.

Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO Soft, I will go along;

An if you leave me’so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO

Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.

This is not Romeo; he’s some other where.

BENVOLIO

Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?

ROMEO What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO

Groan? Why no; but sadly tell me who.

ROMEO

Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,

A word ill urged to one that is so ill.

In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO

I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO

A right good markman; and she’s fair I love.

BENVOLIO

A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO

Well, in that hit you miss. She’ll not be hit

With Cupid’s arrow; she hath Dian’s wit,

And, in strong proof of chastity well armed,

From love’s weak childish bow she lives unharmed.

She will not stay the siege of loving terms,

Nor bide th’encounter of assailing eyes,

Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.

O, she is rich in beauty, only poor

That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO

Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO

She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;

For beauty starved with her severity

Cuts beauty off from all posterity.

She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,

To merit bliss by making me despair.

She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow

Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO

Be ruled by me; forget to think of her.

ROMEO

O, teach me how I should forget to think!

BENVOLIO

By giving liberty unto thine eyes.

Examine other beauties.

ROMEO ’Tis the way

To call hers, exquisite, in question more.

These happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows,

Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.

He that is strucken blind cannot forget

The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.

Show me a mistress that is passing fair,

What doth her beauty serve but as a note

Where I may read who passed that passing fair?

Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO

I’ll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. Exeunt





1.2 Enter Capulet, Paris, and ⌈Peter,⌉ a servingman



CAPULET

But Montague is bound as well as I,

In penalty alike, and ’tis not hard, I think,

For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS

Of honourable reckoning are you both,

And pity ’tis you lived at odds so long.

But now, my lord: what say you to my suit?

CAPULET

But saying o’er what I have said before.

My child is yet a stranger in the world;

She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.

Let two more summers wither in their pride

Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS

Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET

And too soon marred are those so early made.

But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;

My will to her consent is but a part,

And, she agreed, within her scope of choice

Lies my consent and fair-according voice.

This night I hold an old-accustomed feast

Whereto I have invited many a guest

Such as I love, and you among the store,

One more most welcome, makes my number more.

At my poor house look to behold this night

Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.

Such comfort as do lusty young men feel

When well-apparelled April on the heel

Of limping winter treads—even such delight

Among fresh female buds shall you this night

Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,

And like her most whose merit most shall be,

Which on more view of many, mine, being one,

May stand in number, though in reck’ning none.

Come, go with me. (Giving ⌈Peter⌉ a paper) Go, sirrah,

trudge about;

Through fair Verona find those persons out

Whose names are written there, and to them say

My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Exeunt Capulet and Paris





⌈PETER⌉ Find them out whose names are written here? It

is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his

yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his

pencil and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to

find those persons whose names are here writ, and can

never find what names the writing person hath here

writ. I must to the learned.

Enter Benvolio and Romeo



In good time.

BENVOLIO (to Romeo)

Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning,

One pain is lessened by another’s anguish.

Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning.

One desperate grief cures with another’s languish.

Take thou some new infection to thy eye,

And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO

Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO

Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;

Shut up in prison, kept without my food,

Whipped and tormented and—(to ⌈Peter⌉ Good e’en,

good fellow.

⌈PETER⌉

God gi‘good e’en. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO

Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

⌈PETER⌉ erhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO

Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

⌈PETER⌉ Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.

ROMEO Stay, fellow, I can read.

He reads the letter





‘Signor Martino and his wife and daughters,

County Anselme and his beauteous sisters,

The lady widow of Vitruvio,

Signor Placentio and his lovely nieces,

Mercutio and his brother Valentine,

Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,

My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,

Signor Valentio and his cousin Tybalt,

Lucio and the lively Helena.’

A fair assembly. Whither should they come?

⌈PETER⌉ Up.

ROMEO Whither?

⌈PETER⌉ To supper to our house.

ROMEO Whose house?

⌈PETER⌉ My master’s.

ROMEO

Indeed, I should have asked thee that before.

⌈PETER⌉ Now I’ll tell you without asking. My master is

the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house

of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine.

Rest you merry. Exit

BENVOLIO

At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s

Sups the fair Rosaline, whom thou so loves,

With all the admirèd beauties of Verona.

Go thither, and with unattainted eye

Compare her face with some that I shall show,

And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO

When the devout religion of mine eye

Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;

And these who, often drowned, could never die,

Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.

One fairer than my love !—the all-seeing sun

Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO

Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,

Herself poised with herself in either eye;

But in that crystal scales let there be weighed

Your lady’s love against some other maid

That I will show you shining at this feast,

And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

ROMEO

I’ll go along, no such sight to be shown,

But to rejoice in splendour of mine own. Exeunt





1.3 Enter Capulet’s Wife and the Nurse



CAPULET’S WIFE

Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE

Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,

I bade her come. What, lamb, what, ladybird—

God forbid—where is this girl? What, Juliet!

Enter Juliet

JULIET How now, who calls?

NURSE Your mother.

JULIET

Madam, I am here. What is your will?

CAPULET’S WIFE

This is the matter.—Nurse, give leave a while.

We must talk in secret.—Nurse, come back again.

I have remembered me, thou s’ hear our counsel.

Thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age.

NURSE

Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

CAPULET’S WIFE She’s not fourteen.

NURSE I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth—and yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four—she’s not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammastide?

CAPULET’S WIFE A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE

Even or odd, of all days in the year

Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.

Susan and she—God rest all Christian souls!—

Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;

She was too good for me. But, as I said,

On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen,

That shall she, marry, I remember it well.

‘Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,

And she was weaned—I never shall forget it–

Of all the days of the year upon that day,

For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,

Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.

My lord and you were then at Mantua.

Nay, I do bear a brain! But, as I said,

When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple

Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,

To see it tetchy and fall out wi’th’ dug!

‘Shake’, quoth the dove-housed‘Twas no need, I trow,

To bid me trudge;

And since that time it is eleven years,

For then she could stand high-lone. Nay, by th’ rood,

She could have run and waddled all about,

For even the day before, she broke her brow,

And then my husband—God be with his soul,

A was a merry man!—took up the child.

‘Yea,’ quoth he, ‘dost thou fall upon thy face?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,

Wilt thou not, Jule?’ And, by my halidom,

The pretty wretch left crying and said ‘Ay’.

To see now how a jest shall come about!

I warrant an I should live a thousand years

I never should forget it. ‘Wilt thou not, Jule?’ quoth he,

And, pretty fool, it stinted and said ‘Ay’.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.

NURSE

Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh

To think it should leave crying and say ‘Ay’.

And yet, I warrant, it had upon it brow

A bump as big as a young cock‘rel’s stone.

A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.

‘Yea,’ quoth my husband, ‘fall’st upon thy face?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou com’st to age,

Wilt thou not, Jule?’ It stinted and said ‘Ay’.

JULIET

And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.

NURSE

Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace,

Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nursed.

An I might live to see thee married once,

I have my wish.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Marry, that ’marry’ is the very theme

I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,

How stands your dispositions to be married?

JULIET

It is an honour that I dream not of.

NURSE

‘An honour’! Were not I thine only nurse,

I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you

Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,

Are made already mothers. By my count

I was your mother much upon these years

That you are now a maid. Thus then, in brief:

The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE

A man, young lady, lady, such a man

As all the world—why, he’s a man of wax.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE

Nay, he’s a flower, in faith, a very flower.

CAPULET’S WIFE (to Juliet)

What say you ? Can you love the gentleman ?

This night you shall behold him at our feast.

Read o‘er the volume of young Paris’ face,

And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen.

Examine every married lineament,

And see how one another lends content;

And what obscured in this fair volume lies

Find written in the margin of his eyes.

This precious book of love, this unbound lover,

To beautify him only lacks a cover.

The fish lives in the sea, and ’tis much pride

For fair without the fair within to hide.

That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory

That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.

So shall you share all that he doth possess

By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE

No less, nay, bigger. Women grow by men.

CAPULET’s WIFE (to Juliet)

Speak briefly: can you like of Paris’ love?

JULIET

I’ll look to like, if looking liking move;

But no more deep will I endart mine eye

Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Enter ⌈Peter⌉





⌈PETER⌉ Madam, the guests are come, supper served up,

you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed

in the pantry, and everything in extremity. I must hence

to wait. I beseech you follow straight.

CAPULET’S WIFE

We follow thee. Exit ⌈Peter⌉

Juliet, the County stays.





NURSE

Go, girl; seek happy nights to happy days. Exeunt





1.4 Enter Romeo, Mercutio, and Benvolio, as masquers, with five or six other masquers, ⌈bearing a drum and torches⌉



ROMEO

What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse,

Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO

The date is out of such prolixity.

We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,

Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,

Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,

Nor no without-book Prologue faintly spoke

After the prompter for our entrance.

But let them measure us by what they will,

We’ll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO

Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling;

Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO

Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO

Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes

With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead

So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO

You are a lover; borrow Cupid’s wings,

And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO

I am too sore empiercèd with his shaft

To soar with his light feathers, and so bound

I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe;

Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO

And to sink in it should you burden love—

Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO

Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,

Too rude, too boist’rous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO

If love be rough with you, be rough with love.

Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.

Give me a case to put my visage in,

A visor for a visor. What care I

What curious eye doth quote deformity?

Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

⌈They put on visors⌉





BENVOLIO

Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in

But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO

A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart

Tickle the sense-less rushes with their heels,

For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase.

I’ll be a candle-holder and look on.

The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.

⌈He takes a torch⌉

MERCUTIO

Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word.

If thou art dun we’ll draw thee from the mire

Of—save your reverence—love, wherein thou stickest

Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO

Nay, that’s not so.

MERCUTIO I mean, sir, in delay

We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day.

Take our good meaning, for our judgement sits

Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO

And we mean well in going to this masque,

But ’tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO Why, may one ask?

ROMEO

I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO And so did I.

ROMEO

Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO

In bed asleep while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO

O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.

BENVOLIO Queen Mab, what’s she?

MERCUTIO

She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes

In shape no bigger than an agate stone

On the forefinger of an alderman,

Drawn with a team of little atomi

Athwart men’s noses as they lie asleep.

Her wagon spokes made of long spinners’ legs;

The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;

Her traces, of the moonshine’s wat‘ry beams;

Her collars, of the smallest spider web;

Her whip, of cricket’s bone, the lash of film;

Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat

Not half so big as a round little worm

Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.

Her chariot is an empty hazelnut

Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,

Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers.

And in this state she gallops night by night

Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love;

O’er courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight;

O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream,

Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues

Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.

Sometime she gallops o’er a lawyer’s lip,

And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;

And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail

Tickling a parson’s nose as a lies asleep;

Then dreams he of another benefice.

Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck,

And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,

Of breaches, ambuscados, Spanish blades,

Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon

Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,

And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,

And sleeps again. This is that very Mab

That plaits the manes of horses in the night,

And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,

Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.

This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,

That presses them and learns them first to bear,

Making them women of good carriage.

This is she—

ROMEO Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!

Thou talk’st of nothing.

MERCUTIO True. I talk of dreams,

Which are the children of an idle brain,

Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,

Which is as thin of substance as the air,

And more inconstant than the wind, who woos

Even now the frozen bosom of the north,

And, being angered, puffs away from thence,

Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO

This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO

I fear too early, for my mind misgives

Some consequence yet hanging in the stars

Shall bitterly begin his fearful date

With this night’s revels, and expire the term

Of a despised life, closed in my breast,

By some vile forfeit of untimely death.

But he that hath the steerage of my course

Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO Strike, drum.

They march about the stage and ⌈exeunt⌉





1.5 ⌈Peter⌉ and other Servingmen come forth with napkins



⌈PETER⌉ Where’s Potpan, that he helps not to take away?

He shift a trencher, he scrape a trencher!

FIRST SERVINGMAN When good manners shall lie all in one

or two men’s hands, and they unwashed too, ’tis a foul

thing.

⌈PETER⌉ Away with the joint-stools, remove the court–

cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece

of marzipan, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in

Susan Grindstone and Nell. Anthony and Potpan I

SECOND SERVINGMAN Ay, boy, ready.

⌈PETER⌉ You are looked for and called for, asked for and

sought for, in the great chamber.

⌈FIRST⌉ SERVINGMAN We cannot be here and there too.

Cheerly, boys! Be brisk a while, and the longest liver take all.

⌈They come and go, setting forth tables and chairs.⌉ Enter ⌈Musicians, then⌉ at one door Capulet, ⌈his Wife,⌉ his Cousin, Juliet., ⌈the Nurse,⌉ Tybalt, his page, Petruccio, and all the guests and gentlewomen; at another door, the masquers: ⌈Romeo, Benvolio and Mercutio⌉





CAPULET (to the masquers)

Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes

Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you.

Aha, my mistresses, which of you all

Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,

She, I’ll swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now?

Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day

That I have worn a visor, and could tell

A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear

Such as would please. ’Tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone.

You are welcome, gentlemen. Come, musicians, play.

Music plays, and the masquers, guests, and gentlewomen dance. ⌈Romeo stands apart⌉



A hall, a hall! Give room, and foot it, girls.

(To Servingmen) More light, you knaves, and turn the

tables up,

And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.

(To his Cousin) Ah sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes

well.

Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,

For you and I are past our dancing days.

⌈Capulet and his Cousin sit⌉



How long is’t now since last yourself and I

Were in a masque?

CAPULET’S COUSIN By’r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET

What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much.

’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,

Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,

Some five-and-twenty years; and then we masqued.

CAPULET’S COUSIN

’Tis more, ’tis more. His son is elder, sir.

His son is thirty.

CAPULET Will you tell me that?

His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO (to a Servingman)

What lady’s that which doth enrich the hand Of yonder knight?

SERVINGMAN I know not, sir.

ROMEO

O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!

It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night

As a rich jewel in an Ethiope’s ear—

Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear.

So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows

As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows.

The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand,

And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand.

Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,

For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT

This, by his voice, should be a Montague.

Fetch me my rapier, boy. ⌈Exit page⌉

What, dares the slave





Come hither, covered with an antic face,

To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?

Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,

To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET ⌈standing⌉

Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT

Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,

A villain that is hither come in spite

To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET

Young Romeo, is it?

TYBALT ’Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET

Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.

A bears him like a portly gentleman,

And, to say truth, Verona brags of him

To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.

I would not for the wealth of all this town

Here in my house do him disparagement.

Therefore be patient, take no note of him.

It is my will, the which if thou respect,

Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,

An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT

It fits when such a villain is a guest.

I’ll not endure him.

CAPULET He shall be endured.

What, goodman boy, I say he shall. Go to,

Am I the master here or you ? Go to—

You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul.

You’ll make a mutiny among my guests,

You will set cock-a-hoop! You’ll be the man!

TYBALT

Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.

CAPULET Go to, go to,

You are a saucy boy. Is’t so, indeed?

This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what,

You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time—

⌈A dance ends. Juliet retires to her place of stand, where Romeo awaits her⌉





(To the guests) Well said, my hearts! (To Tybalt) You are

a princox, go.

Be quiet, or—(to Servingmen) more light, more light!—

(to Tybalt) for shame,

I’ll make you quiet. (To the guests) What, cheerly, my

hearts!

⌈The music plays again, and the guests dance⌉





TYBALT

Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting

Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.

I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,

Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt’rest gall. Exit

ROMEO (to Juliet, touching her hand)

If I profane with my unworthiest hand

This holy shrine, the gentler sin is this:

My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand

To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,

Which mannerly devotion shows in this.

For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,

And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.

ROMEO

Have not saints lips, and holy palmers, too?

JULIET

Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO

O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do:

They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET

Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.

ROMEO

Then move not while my prayer’s effect I take.

He kisses her



Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purged.

JULIET

Then have my lips the sin that they have took.





ROMEO

Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again.

He kisses her





JULIET You kiss by th’ book.

NURSE

Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

⌈Juliet departs to her mother⌉





ROMEO

What is her mother?

NURSE Marry, bachelor,

Her mother is the lady of the house,

And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.

I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.

I tell you, he that can lay hold of her

Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO (aside) Is she a Capulet?

O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.

BENVOLIO

Away, be gone, the sport is at the best.

ROMEO

Ay, so I fear, the more is my unrest.

CAPULET

Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.

We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.

⌈They whisper in his ear⌉





Is it e’en so? Why then, I thank you all.

I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.

More torches here ! Come on then, let’s to bed.

(To his Cousin) Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.

I’ll to my rest.

Exeunt Capulet, ⌈his Wife,⌉ and his Cousin. The guests, gentlewomen, masquers, musicians, and servingmen begin to leave





JULIET

Come hither, Nurse. What is yon gentleman?

NURSE

The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET

What’s he that now is going out of door?

NURSE

Marry, that, I think, be young Petruccio.

JULIET

What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE I know not.

JULIET

Go ask his name.

The Nurse goes



If he be married,

My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE (returning)

His name is Romeo, and a Montague,

The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET ⌈aside⌉

My only love sprung from my only hate!

Too early seen unknown, and known too late!

Prodigious birth of love it is to me

That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE

What’s tis? what’s tis?

JULIET A rhyme I learnt even now

Of one I danced withal.

One calls within ‘Juliet!’





NURSE Anon, anon.

Come, let’s away. The strangers all are gone. Exeunt





2.0 Enter Chorus



CHORUS

Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

And young affection gapes to be his heir.

That fair for which love groaned for and would die,

With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.

Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,

Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;

But to his foe supposed he must complain,

And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks.

Being held a foe, he may not have access

To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,

And she as much in love, her means much less

To meet her new belovèd anywhere.

But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,

Temp’ring extremities with extreme sweet. Exit





2.1 Enter Romeo



ROMEO

Can I go forward when my heart is here?

Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

⌈He turns back and withdraws.⌉



Enter Benvolio with Mercutio





BENVOLIO (calling)

Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!

MERCUTIO

He is wise, and, on my life, hath stol’n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO

He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall. Call, good Mercutio.

⌈MERCUTIO⌉ Nay, I’ll conjure too.

Romeo! Humours! adman! Passion! Lover!

Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.

Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.

Cry but ‘Ay me!’ Pronounce but ‘love’ and ‘dove’.

Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,

One nickname for her purblind son and heir,

Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim

When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.—

He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.

The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.—

I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes,

By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,

By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,

And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,

That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO

An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO

This cannot anger him. ’Twould anger him

To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle

Of some strange nature, letting it there stand

Till she had laid it and conjured it down.

That were some spite. My invocation

Is fair and honest. In his mistress’ name,

I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO

Come, he hath hid himself among these trees

To be consorted with the humorous night.

Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO

If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.

Now will he sit under a medlar tree

And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit

As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.

O Romeo, that she were, O that she were

An open-arse, and thou a popp’rin’ pear.

Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle-bed.

This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.

Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO Go then, for ’tis in vain

To seek him here that means not to be found.

Exeunt Benvolio and Mercutio





ROMEO ⌈coming forward⌉

He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?

It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.

Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,

Who is already sick and pale with grief

That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.

Be not her maid, since she is envious.

Her vestal livery is but sick and green,

And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.

⌈Enter Juliet aloft⌉





It is my lady, O, it is my love.

O that she knew she were!

She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?

Her eye discourses; I will answer it.

I am too bold. ’Tis not to me she speaks.

Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,

Having some business, do entreat her eyes

To twinkle in their spheres till they return.

What if her eyes were there, they in her head?—

The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars

As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven

Would through the airy region stream so bright

That birds would sing and think it were not night.

See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.

O, that I were a glove upon that hand,

That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET Ay me.

ROMEO (aside) She speaks.

O, speak again, bright angel; for thou art

As glorious to this night, being o‘er my head,

As is a winged messenger of heaven

Unto the white upturned wond’ring eyes

Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him

When he bestrides the lazy-passing clouds

And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET (not knowing Romeo hears her)

O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?

Deny thy father and refuse thy name,

Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,

And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO (aside)

Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET

’Tis but thy name that is my enemy.

Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.

What’s Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,

Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part

Belonging to a man. O, be some other name I

What’s in a name? That which we call a rose

By any other word would smell as sweet.

So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,

Retain that dear perfection which he owes

Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,

And for thy name—which is no part of thee—

Take all myself.

ROMEO (to Juliet) I take thee at thy word.

Call me but love and I’ll be new baptized.

Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET

What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,

So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO By a name

I know not how to tell thee who I am.

My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself

Because it is an enemy to thee.

Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET

My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words

Of thy tongue’s uttering, yet I know the sound.

Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO

Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET

How cam’st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?

The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,

And the place death, considering who thou art,

If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO

With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls,

For stony limits cannot hold love out,

And what love can do, that dares love attempt.

Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET

If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO

Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye

Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,

And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET

I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO

I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes,

And but thou love me, let them find me here.

My life were better ended by their hate

Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET

By whose direction found’st thou out this place?

ROMEO

By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.

He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.

I am no pilot, yet wert thou as far

As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,

I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET

Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,

Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek

For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.

Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny

What I have spoke; but farewell, compliment.

Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say ‘Ay’,

And I will take thy word. Yet if thou swear‘st

Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries,

They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,

If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully;

Or if thou think’st I am too quickly won,

I’ll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,

So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.

In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,

And therefore thou mayst think my ‘haviour light.

But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true

Than those that have more cunning to be strange.

I should have been more strange, I must confess,

But that thou overheard’st, ere I was ware,

My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,

And not impute this yielding to light love,

Which the dark night hath so discoverèd.

ROMEO

Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,

That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—

JULIET

O swear not by the moon, th’inconstant moon

That monthly changes in her circled orb,

Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO

What shall I swear by?

JULIET Do not swear at all,

Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,

Which is the god of my idolatry,

And I’ll believe thee.

ROMEO If my heart’s dear love—

JULIET

Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,

I have no joy of this contract tonight.

It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,

Too like the lightning which doth cease to be

Ere one can say it lightens. Sweet, good night.

This bud of love by summer’s ripening breath

May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.

Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest

Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO

O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET

What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO

Th’exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.

JULIET

I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,

And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO

Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET

But to be frank and give it thee again.

And yet I wish but for the thing I have.

My bounty is as boundless as the sea,

My love as deep. The more I give to thee

The more I have, for both are infinite.

Nurse calls within





I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.—

Anon, good Nurse!—Sweet Montague, be true.

Stay but a little; I will come again. Exit

ROMEO

O blessed, blessèd night! I am afeard,

Being in night, all this is but a dream,

Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

Enter Juliet aloft





JULIET

Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.

If that thy bent of love be honourable,

Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,

By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,

Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,

And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay,

And follow thee, my lord, throughout the world.

⌈NURSE⌉ (within)

Madam!

JULIET

I come, anon. (To Romeo) But if thou mean’st not well,

I do beseech thee—

⌈NURSE⌉ (within) Madam!

JULIET By and by I come.—

To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.

Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO So thrive my soul—

JULIET A thousand times good night. Exit

ROMEO

A thousand times the worse to want thy light.

Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,

But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

⌈He is going.⌉ Enter Juliet aloft again





JULIET

Hist, Romeo! Hist! O for a falconer’s voice

To lure this tassel-gentle back again.

Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,

Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,

And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine

With repetition of my Romeo’s name. Romeo!

ROMEO

It is my soul that calls upon my name.

How silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night,

Like softest music to attending ears!

JULIET

Romeo!

ROMEO My nyas?

JULIET What o’clock tomorrow

Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO By the hour of nine.

JULIET

I will not fail; ’tis twenty year till then.

I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO

Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET

I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,

Rememb’ring how I love thy company.

ROMEO

And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,

Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET

’Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone—

And yet no farther than a wanton’s bird,

That lets it hop a little from his hand,

Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,

And with a silk thread plucks it back again,

So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO

I would I were thy bird.

JULIET Sweet, so would I.

Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.

Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow

That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

⌈ROMEO⌉

Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.

Exit Juliet



Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest.

Hence will I to my ghostly sire’s close cell,

His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

Exit





2.2 Enter Friar Laurence, with a basket



FRIAR LAURENCE

The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,

Chequ’ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,

And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels

From forth day’s path and Titan’s fiery wheels.

Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye

The day to cheer and night’s dank dew to dry,

I must up-fill this osier cage of ours

With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers.

The earth, that’s nature’s mother, is her tomb.

What is her burying grave, that is her womb,

And from her womb children of divers kind

We sucking on her natural bosom find,

Many for many virtues excellent,

None but for some, and yet all different.

O mickle is the powerful grace that lies

In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities,

For naught so vile that on the earth doth live

But to the earth some special good doth give;

Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,

Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.

Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied,

And vice sometime’s by action dignified.

Enter Romeo





Within the infant rind of this weak flower

Poison hath residence, and medicine power,

For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;

Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.

Two such opposed kings encamp them still

In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will;

And where the worser is predominant,

Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO

Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAURENCE Benedicite.

What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?

Young son, it argues a distempered head

So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.

Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,

And where care lodges, sleep will never lie,

But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain

Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.

Therefore thy earliness doth me assure

Thou art uproused with some distemp’rature;

Or if not so, then here I hit it right:

Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO

That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE

God pardon sin!—Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO

With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No,

I have forgot that name and that name’s woe.

FRIAR LAURENCE

That’s my good son; but where hast thou been then?

ROMEO

I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.

I have been feasting with mine enemy,

Where on a sudden one hath wounded me

That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies

Within thy help and holy physic lies.

I bear no hatred, blessed man, for lo,

My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.

Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO

Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set

On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.

As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,

And all combined save what thou must combine

By holy marriage. When and where and how

We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow

I’ll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,

That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!

Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,

So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies

Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.

Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine

Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!

How much salt water thrown away in waste

To season love, that of it doth not taste!

The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears.

Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.

Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit

Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.

If e’er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,

Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.

And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then:

Women may fall when there’s no strength in men.

ROMEO

Thou chidd’st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAURENCE

For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO

And bad’st me bury love.

FRIAR LAURENCE Not in a grave

To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO

I pray thee, chide me not. Her I love now

Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.

The other did not so.

FRIAR LAURENCE O, she knew well

Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.

But come, young waverer, come, go with me.

In one respect I’ll thy assistant be;

For this alliance may so happy prove

To turn your households’ rancour to pure love.

ROMEO

O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast. Exeunt





2.3 Enter Benvolio and Mercutio



MERCUTIO Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO

Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO

Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,

Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO

Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,

Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.

MERCUTIO

A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared. is

MERCUTIO Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead—stabbed with a white wench’s black eye, run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt-shaft; and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

⌈BENVOLIO⌉ Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO More than Prince of Cats. O, he’s the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing pricksong: keeps time, distance, and proportion. He rests his minim rests: one, two, and the third in your bosom; the very butcher of a silk button. A duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado, the puntoreverso, the hai.

BENVOLIO The what?

MERCUTIO The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting phantasims, these new tuners of accent! ‘By Jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore.’ Why is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these ‘pardon-me’s’, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O, their bones, their bones! Enter Romeo

BENVOLIO Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!

MERCUTIO Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified ! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady was a kitchen wench—marry, she had a better love to berhyme her—Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signor Romeo, bonjour. There’s a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you? 45

MERCUTIO The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive ?

ROMEO Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO That’s as much as to say such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO Meaning to curtsy.

MERCUTIO Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO Right.

ROMEO Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing, solely singular.

ROMEO O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!

MERCUTIO Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits faints.

ROMEO Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I’ll cry a match.

MERCUTIO Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than I am sure I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO Thy wit is very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.

ROMEO And is it not then well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO O, here’s a wit of cheverel, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad.

ROMEO I stretch it out for that word ‘broad’, which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo, now art thou what thou art by art as well as by nature, for this drivelling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large. MERCUTIO O, thou art deceived, I would have made it short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer. Enter the Nurse, and Peter, her man

ROMEO Here’s goodly gear.

⌈BENVOLIO⌉ A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO Two, two—a shirt and a smock.

NURSE Peter.

PETER Anon.

NURSE My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan’s the fairer face.

NURSE God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO God ye good e’en, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE Is it good e’en?

MERCUTIO ’Tis no less, I tell ye: for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

NURSE Out upon you, what a man are you!

ROMEO One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

NURSE By my troth, it is well said. ‘For himself to mar’, quoth a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

NURSE You say well.

MERCUTIO Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i’faith, wisely, wisely.

NURSE (to Romeo) If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.

BENVOLIO She will endite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO A bawd, a bawd, a bawd. So ho!

ROMEO What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.

⌈He walks by them and⌉ sings



An old hare hoar

And an old hare hoar

Is very good meat in Lent.

But a hare that is hoar

Is too much for a score

When it hoars ere it be spent.





Romeo, will you come to your father’s ? We’ll to dinner thither.

ROMEO I will follow you.

MERCUTIO Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, ⌈sings⌉ ‘lady, lady, lady’. Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio

NURSE I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

NURSE An a speak anything against me, I’ll take him down an a were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; an if I cannot, I’ll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-jills, I am none of his skeans-mates. (To Peter) And thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure.

PETER I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out; I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another man if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.

NURSE Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! (To Romeo) Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you, my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say I will keep to myself, but first let me tell ye if ye should lead her in a fool’s paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say, for the gentlewoman is young; and therefore if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee—

NURSE Good heart, and i’faith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

NURSE I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which as I take it is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO Bid her devise

Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,

And there she shall at Friar Laurence’ cell

Be shrived and married. (Offering money) Here is for

thy pains.





NURSE No, truly, sir, not a penny.

ROMEO Go to, I say, you shall.

NURSE ⌈taking the money⌉

This afternoon, sir. Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO

And stay, good Nurse, behind the abbey wall.

Within this hour my man shall be with thee

And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,

Which to the high topgallant of my joy

Must be my convoy in the secret night.

Farewell. Be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains.

Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE

Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?

NURSE

Is your man secret? Did you ne‘er hear say

‘Two may keep counsel, putting one away’ ?

ROMEO

I warrant thee my man’s as true as steel.

NURSE

Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.

Lord, Lord, when ’twas a little prating thing—

O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris,

That would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul,

Had as lief see a toad, a very toad,

As see him. I anger her sometimes,

And tell her that Paris is the properer man;

But I’ll warrant you, when I say so she looks

As pale as any clout in the versal world.

Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin

Both with a letter?

ROMEO

Ay, Nurse, what of that? Both with an ‘R’.

NURSE Ah, mocker—that’s the dog’s name. ’R’ is for the—no, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE Ay, a thousand times. Peter!

PETER Anon.

NURSE ⌈giving Peter her fan⌉ Before, and apace.

Exeunt ⌈Peter and Nurse at one door, Romeo at another door⌉





2.4 Enter Juliet



JULIET

The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.

In half an hour she promised to return.

Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so.

O, she is lame! Love’s heralds should be thoughts,

Which ten times faster glides than the sun’s beams

Driving back shadows over louring hills.

Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,

And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.

Now is the sun upon the highmost hill

Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve

Is three long hours, yet she is not come.

Had she affections and warm youthful blood

She would be as swift in motion as a ball.

My words would bandy her to my sweet love,

And his to me.

But old folks, many feign as they were dead—

Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.

Enter the Nurse and Peter



O God, she comes! O honey Nurse, what news?

Hast thou met with him ? Send thy man away.

NURSE Peter, stay at the gate. Exit Peter

JULIET

Now, good sweet Nurse—O Lord, why look‘st thou sad ?

Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;

If good, thou sham’st the music of sweet news

By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE

I am a-weary. Give me leave a while.

Fie, how my bones ache. What a jaunce have I!

JULIET

I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news.

Nay, come, I pray thee speak, good, good Nurse, speak.

NURSE

Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay a while?

Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET

How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath

To say to me that thou art out of breath?

The excuse that thou dost make in this delay

Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.

Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.

Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance.

Let me be satisfied: is’t good or bad?

NURSE Well, you have made a simple choice. You know not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he; though his face be better than any man‘s, yet his leg excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I’ll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET

No, no. But all this did I know before.

What says he of our marriage—what of that?

NURSE

Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!

It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.

My back—

⌈Juliet rubs her back⌉



a’ t’other side—ah, my back, my back!

Beshrew your heart for sending me about

To catch my death with jauncing up and down.

JULIET

I’faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.

Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?

NURSE Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a

courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant,

a virtuous—where is your mother?

JULIET

Where is my mother? Why, she is within.

Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!

‘Your love says like an honest gentleman

“Where is your mother?” ’

NURSE O, God’s Lady dear!

Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.

Is this the poultice for my aching bones?

Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET

Here’s such a coil ! Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE

Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET I have.

NURSE

Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence’ cell.

There stays a husband to make you a wife.

Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks.

They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news.

Hie you to church. I must another way,

To fetch a ladder by the which your love

Must climb a bird’s nest soon, when it is dark.

I am the drudge, and toil in your delight,

But you shall bear the burden soon at night.

Go, I’ll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.

JULIET

Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





2.5 Enter Friar Laurence and Romeo



FRIAR LAURENCE

So smile the heavens upon this holy act

That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!

ROMEO

Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,

It cannot countervail the exchange of joy

That one short minute gives me in her sight.

Do thou but close our hands with holy words,

Then love-devouring death do what he dare—

It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE

These violent delights have violent ends,

And in their triumph die like fire and powder,

Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey

Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,

And in the taste confounds the appetite.

Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.

Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

Enter Juliet Somewhat fast, and embraceth Romeo⌉





Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot

Will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint.

A lover may bestride the gossamers

That idles in the wanton summer air,

And yet not fall, so light is vanity.

JULIET

Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET

As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO

Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy

Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more

To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath

This neighbour air, and let rich music’s tongue

Unfold the imagined happiness that both

Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET

Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,

Brags of his substance, not of ornament.

They are but beggars that can count their worth,

But my true love is grown to such excess

I cannot sum up some of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Come, come with me, and we will make short work,

For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone

Till Holy Church incorporate two in one. Exeunt





3.1 Enter Mercutio with his page, Benvolio, and men



BENVOLIO

I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire.

The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,

And if we meet we shall not scape a brawl,

For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says ‘God send me no need of thee’, and by the operation of the second cup, draws him on the drawer when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO And what to?

MERCUTIO Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou—why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter; with another for tying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO The fee simple? O, simple!

Enter Tybalt, Petruccio, and others





BENVOLIO By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT (to Petruccio and the others)

Follow me close, for I will speak to them.

(To the Montagues) Gentlemen, good e’en. A word with

one of you.

MERCUTIO And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something: make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO Could you not take some occasion without giving ?

TYBALT

Mercutio, thou consort’st with Romeo.

MERCUTIO ‘Consort’ ? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. ⌈touching his rapier⌉ Here’s my fiddlestick; here’s that shall make you dance. Zounds—‘Consort’!

BENVOLIO

We talk here in the public haunt of men.

Either withdraw unto some private place,

Or reason coldly of your grievances,

Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO

Men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.

I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.

Enter Romeo





TYBALT

Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.

MERCUTIO

But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.

Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower.

Your worship in that sense may call him ‘man’.

TYBALT

Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford

No better term than this: thou art a villain.

ROMEO

Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee

Doth much excuse the appertaining rage

To such a greeting. Villain am I none.

Therefore, farewell. I see thou knowest me not.

TYBALT

Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries

That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO

I do protest I never injured thee,

But love thee better than thou canst devise

Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.

And so, good Capulet—which name I tender

As dearly as mine own—be satisfied.

MERCUTIO ⌈drawing⌉

O calm, dishonourable, vile submission! 1

Alla stoccado carries it away.

Tybalt, you ratcatcher, come, will you walk?

TYBALT What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

TYBALT (drawing) I am for you.

ROMEO

Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO (to Tybalt) Come, sir, your passado.

They fight





ROMEO ⌈drawing⌉

Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons.

Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage.

Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath

Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.

Hold, Tybalt, good Mercutio.

⌈Romeo beats down their points and rushes between them. Tybalt under Romeo’s arm thrusts Mercutio in⌉





⌈PETRUCCIO⌉ Away, Tybalt!

Exeunt Tybalt, Petruccio, and their followers





MERCUTIO I am hurt.

A plague o’ both your houses. I am sped.

Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO

Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, ’tis enough.

Where is my page? Go, villain. Fetch a surgeon.

Exit page





ROMEO

Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO No, ‘tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but ’tis enough. ’Twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o’ both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us ? I was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO

Help me into some house, Benvolio,

Or I shall faint. A plague o’ both your houses.

They have made worms’ meat of me.

I have it, and soundly, too. Your houses!

Exeunt all but Romeo





ROMEO

This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally,

My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt

In my behalf, my reputation stained

With Tybalt’s slander—Tybalt, that an hour

Hath been my cousin! O sweet Juliet,

Thy beauty hath made me effeminate,

And in my temper softened valour’s steel.

Enter Benvolio





BENVOLIO

O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!

That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,

Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO

This day’s black fate on more days doth depend.

This but begins the woe others must end.

Enter Tybalt





BENVOLIO

Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO

He gad in triumph, and Mercutio slain ?

Away to heaven, respective lenity,

And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.

Now, Tybalt, take the ‘villain’ back again

That late thou gav’st me, for Mercutio’s soul

Is but a little way above our heads,

Staying for thine to keep him company.

Either thou, or I, or both must go with him.

TYBALT

Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,

Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO This shall determine that.

They fight. Tybalt is wounded. He falls and dies





BENVOLIO Romeo, away, be gone.

The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.

Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death

If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.

ROMEO

O, I am fortune’s fool!

BENVOLIO Why dost thou stay?

Exit Romeo



Enter Citizens ⌈of the watchi⌉





CITIZEN ⌈0F THE WATCH⌉

Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?

Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO

There lies that Tybalt.

CITIZEN ⌈OF THE WATCH⌉ (to Tybalt) Up, sir, go with me.

I charge thee in the Prince’s name, obey.

Enter the Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives, and all





PRINCE

Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO

O noble Prince, I can discover all

The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.

There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,

That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Tybalt, my cousin, O, my brother’s child!

O Prince, O cousin, husband! O, the blood is spilled

Of my dear kinsman ! Prince, as thou art true,

For blood of ours shed blood of Montague!

O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE Benvolio, who began this fray?

BENVOLIO

Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay.

Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink

How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal

Your high displeasure. All this-utterèd

With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed—

Could not take truce with the unruly spleen

Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts

With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast,

Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,

And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

Cold death aside, and with the other sends

It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity

Retorts it. Romeo, he cries aloud,

‘Hold, friends, friends, part!’ and swifter than his

tongue

His agent arm beats down their fatal points,

And ’twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm

An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life

Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled,

But by and by comes back to Romeo,

Who had but newly entertained revenge,

And to’t they go like lightning; for ere I

Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,

And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.

This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

CAPULET’S WIFE

He is a kinsman to the Montague.

Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.

Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,

And all those twenty could but kill one life.

I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.

Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.

PRINCE

Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.

Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

⌈MONTAGUE⌉

Not Romeo, Prince. He was Mercutio’s friend.

His fault concludes but what the law should end,

The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE And for that offence

Immediately we do exile him hence.

I have an interest in your hate’s proceeding;

My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.

But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine

That you shall all repent the loss of mine.

I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.

Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.

Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,

Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.

Bear hence this body, and attend our will.

Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

Exeunt with the body





3.2 Enter Juliet



JULIET

Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,

Towards Phoebus’ lodging. Such a waggoner

As Phaeton would whip you to the west

And bring in cloudy night immediately.

Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,

That runaways’ eyes may wink, and Romeo

Leap to these arms untalked of and unseen.

Lovers can see to do their amorous rites

By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,

It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,

Thou sober-suited matron all in black,

And learn me how to lose a winning match

Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.

Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,

With thy black mantle till strange love grown bold

Think true love acted simple modesty.

Come night, come Romeo; come, thou day in night,

For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night

Whiter than new snow on a raven’s back.

Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-browed night,

Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die

Take him and cut him out in little stars,

And he will make the face of heaven so fine

That all the world will be in love with night

And pay no worship to the garish sun.

O, I have bought the mansion of a love

But not possessed it, and though I am sold,

Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day

As is the night before some festival

To an impatient child that hath new robes

And may not wear them.

Enter the Nurse, ⌈wringing her hands,⌉ with the ladder of cords ⌈in her lap⌉





O, here comes my Nurse,

And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks

But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.

Now, Nurse, what news ? What, hast thou there

The cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE ⌈putting down the cords⌉ Ay, ay, the cords.

JULIET

Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE

Ah, welladay! He’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead!

We are undone, lady, we are undone.

Alack the day, he’s gone, he’s killed, he’s dead!

JULIET

Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE Romeo can,

Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,

Who ever would have thought it Romeo?

JULIET

What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?

This torture should be roared in dismal hell.

Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but ‘Ay’,

And that bare vowel ‘I’ shall poison more

Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.

I am not I if there be such an ‘Ay’,

Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer ‘Ay’.

If he be slain, say ‘Ay’; or if not, ‘No’.

Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

NURSE

I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,

God save the mark, here on his manly breast—

A piteous corpse, a bloody, piteous corpse—

Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,

All in gore blood; I swooned at the sight.

JULIET

O, break, my heart, poor bankrupt, break at once!

To prison, eyes; ne’er look on liberty.

Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,

And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

NURSE

O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!

O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman,

That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET

What storm is this that blows so contrary?

Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead?

My dearest cousin and my dearer lord?

Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,

For who is living if those two are gone?

NURSE

Tybalt is gone and Romeo banished.

Romeo that killed him—he is banished.

JULIET

O God, did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?

⌈NURSE⌉

It did, it did, alas the day, it did.

⌈JULIET⌉

O serpent heart hid with a flow‘ring face!

Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?

Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical!

Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!

Despisèd substance of divinest show!

Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st—

A damnèd saint, an honourable villain.

O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell

When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend

In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?

Was ever book containing such vile matter

So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell

In such a gorgeous palace!

NURSE

There’s no trust, no faith, no honesty in men;

All perjured, all forsworn, all naught, dissemblers all.

Ah, where’s my man? Give me some aqua vitae.

These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.

Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET Blistered be thy tongue

For such a wish! He was not born to shame.

Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,

For ’tis a throne where honour may be crowned

Sole monarch of the universal earth.

O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE

Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?

JULIET

Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?

Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name

When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?

But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?

That villain cousin would have killed my husband.

Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!

Your tributary drops belong to woe,

Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.

My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;

And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband.

All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?

Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death,

That murdered me. I would forget it fain,

But O, it presses to my memory

Like damned guilty deeds to sinners’ minds!

‘Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.’

That ‘banishèd’, that one word ‘banishèd’

Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death

Was woe enough, if it had ended there;

Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship

And needly will be ranked with other griefs,

Why followed not, when she said ‘Tybalt’s dead’,

‘Thy father’, or ‘thy mother’, nay, or both,

Which modern lamentation might have moved?

But with a rearward following Tybalt’s death,

‘Romeo is banishèd‘-to speak that word

Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,

All slain, all dead. ‘Romeo is banishèd’—

There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,

In that word’s death. No words can that woe sound.

Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?

NURSE

Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corpse.

Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET

Wash they his wounds with tears; mine shall be spent

When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment.

Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguiled,

Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.

He made you for a highway to my bed,

But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.

Come, cords; come, Nurse; I’ll to my wedding bed,

And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

NURSE (taking up the cords)

Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo

To comfort you. I wot well where he is.

Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.

I’ll to him. He is hid at Laurence’ cell.

JULIET (giving her a ring)

O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight,

And bid him come to take his last farewell.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





3.3 Enter Friar Laurence



FRIAR LAURENCE

Romeo, come forth, come forth, thou fear-full man.

Affliction is enamoured of thy parts,

And thou art wedded to calamity.

Enter Romeo





ROMEO

Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom?

What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand

That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAURENCE Too familiar

Is my dear son with such sour company.

I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.

ROMEO

What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?

FRIAR LAURENCE

A gentler judgement vanished from his lips:

Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.

ROMEO

Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say ‘death’,

For exile hath more terror in his look,

Much more than death. Do not say ‘banishment’.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Hence from Verona art thou banished.

Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO

There is no world without Verona walls

But purgatory, torture, hell itself.

Hence banished is banished from the world,

And world’s exile is death. Then ‘banishèd’

Is death mistermed. Calling death ‘banishèd’

Thou cutt‘st my head off with a golden axe,

And smil’st upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAURENCE

O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!

Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,

Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law

And turned that black word ’death’ to banishment.

This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO

‘Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here

Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog

And little mouse, every unworthy thing,

Live here in heaven and may look on her,

But Romeo may not. More validity,

More honourable state, more courtship lives

In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize

On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand,

And steal immortal blessing from her lips,

Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,

Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.

But Romeo may not, he is banished.

Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.

They are free men, but I am banished.

And sayst thou yet that exile is not death?

Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife,

No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean,

But ‘banishèd’ to kill me—‘banishèd’?

O friar, the damned use that word in hell.

Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,

Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,

A sin-absolver and my friend professed,

To mangle me with that word ‘banishèd’?

FRIAR LAURENCE

Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

ROMEO

O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAURENCE

I’ll give thee armour to keep off that word—

Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy,

To comfort thee though thou art banished.

ROMEO

Yet ‘banishèd’? Hang up philosophy!

Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,

Displant a town, reverse a prince’s doom,

It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

FRIAR LAURENCE

O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO

How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAURENCE

Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO

Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.

Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,

An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,

Doting like me, and like me banished,

Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy

hair,

And fall upon the ground, as I do now,

He falls upon the ground

Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

Knock within

FRIAR LAURENCE

Arise, one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO

Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans

Mist-like enfold me from the search of eyes.

Knocking within





FRIAR LAURENCE

Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo, arise.

Thou wilt be taken.—Stay a white.—Stand up.

Still knock within





Run to my study.—By and by!—God’s will,

What simpleness is this?

Knock within





I come, I come.

Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What’s your

will?

NURSE (within)

Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.

I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAURENCE ⌈opening the door⌉ Welcome then.

Enter the Nurse





NURSE

O holy friar, O tell me, holy friar,

Where is my lady’s lord? Where’s Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE

There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

NURSE

O, he is even in my mistress’ case,

Just in her case! O woeful sympathy,

Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,

Blubb’ring and weeping, weeping and blubb’ring.

(To Romeo) Stand up, stand up, stand an you be a man,

For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand.

Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO (rising)

Nurse.

NURSE Ah sir, ah sir, death’s the end of all.

ROMEO

Spak’st thou of Juliet? How is it with her?

Doth not she think me an old murderer,

Now I have stained the childhood of our joy

With blood removed but little from her own?

Where is she, and how doth she, and what says

My concealed lady to our cancelled love?

NURSE

O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,

And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,

And ’Tybalt’ calls, and then on Romeo cries,

And then down falls again.

ROMEO As if that name

Shot from the deadly level of a gun

Did murder her as that name’s cursed hand

Murdered her kinsman. O tell me, friar, tell me,

In what vile part of this anatomy

Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack

The hateful mansion.

⌈He offers to stab himself, and the Nurse snatches the dagger away⌉





FRIAR LAURENCE Hold thy desperate hand.

Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.

Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote

The unreasonable fury of a beast.

Unseemly woman in a seeming man,

And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!

Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,

I thought thy disposition better tempered.

Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,

And slay thy lady that in thy life lives

By doing damned hate upon thyself?

Why rail‘st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth,

Since birth and heaven and earth, all three, do meet

In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?

Fie, fie, thou sham’st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,

Which like a usurer abound‘st in all,

And usest none in that true use indeed

Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.

Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,

Digressing from the valour of a man;

Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,

Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;

Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,

Misshapen in the conduct of them both,

Like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask

Is set afire by thine own ignorance,

And thou dismembered with thine own defence.

What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,

For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:

There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,

But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.

The law that threatened death becomes thy friend,

And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.

A pack of blessings light upon thy back,

Happiness courts thee in her best array,

But, like a mishavèd and sullen wench,

Thou pout’st upon thy fortune and thy love.

Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.

Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.

Ascend her chamber; hence and comfort her.

But look thou stay not till the watch be set,

For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,

Where thou shalt live till we can find a time

To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,

Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back

With twenty hundred thousand times more joy

Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.

Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,

And bid her hasten all the house to bed,

Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.

Romeo is coming.

NURSE

O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night

To hear good counsel! O, what learning is!

My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO

Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

⌈Nurse offers to go in, and turns again⌉





NURSE (giving the ring)

Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.

Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

ROMEO

How well my comfort is revived by this. Exit Nurse

FRIAR LAURENCE

Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state.

Either be gone before the watch be set,

Or by the break of day disguised from hence.

Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man,

And he shall signify from time to time

Every good hap to you that chances here.

Give me thy hand. ’Tis late. Farewell. Good night.

ROMEO

But that a joy past joy calls out on me,

It were a grief so brief to part with thee.

Farewell. Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





3.4 Enter Capulet, his Wife, and Paris



CAPULET

Things have fall’n out, sir, so unluckily

That we have had no time to move our daughter.

Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,

And so did I. Well, we were born to die.

’Tis very late. She’ll not come down tonight.

I promise you, but for your company

I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS

These times of woe afford no times to woo.

Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

CAPULET’S WIFE

I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.

Tonight she’s mewed up to her heaviness.

⌈Paris offers to go in, and Capulet calls him again⌉





CAPULET

Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender

Of my child’s love. I think she will be ruled

In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.

Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.

Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,

And bid her-mark you me?—on Wednesday next—

But soft—what day is this?

PARIS Monday, my lord.

CAPULET

Monday. Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

O’ Thursday let it be. 0’ Thursday, tell her,

She shall be married to this noble earl.

Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?

We’ll keep no great ado—a friend or two.

For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,

It may be thought we held him carelessly,

Being our kinsman, if we revel much.

Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,

And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS

My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET

Well, get you gone. O’ Thursday be it, then.

(To his Wife) Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.

Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.—

Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!—

Afore me, it is so very late that we

May call it early by and by. Good night.

Exeunt ⌈Capulet and his wife at one door, Paris at another door⌉





3.5 Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft ⌈with the ladder of cords⌉



JULIET

Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.

It was the nightingale, and not the lark,

That pierced the fear-full hollow of thine ear.

Nightly she sings on yon pom’granate tree.

Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO

It was the lark, the herald of the morn,

No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks

Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.

Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day

Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.

I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET

Yon light is not daylight; I know it, I.

It is some meteor that the sun exhaled

To be to thee this night a torchbearer

And light thee on thy way to Mantua.

Therefore stay yet. Thou need’st not to be gone.

ROMEO

Let me be ta‘en, let me be put to death.

I am content, so thou wilt have it so.

I’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye,

’Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia’s brow;

Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat

The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.

I have more care to stay than will to go.

Come, death, and welcome; Juliet wills it so.

How is’t, my soul? Let’s talk. It is not day.

JULIET

It is, it is. Hie hence, be gone, away.

It is the lark that sings so out of tune,

Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.

Some say the lark makes sweet division;

This doth not so, for she divideth us.

Some say the lark and loathed toad changed eyes.

O, now I would they had changed voices, too,

Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,

Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day.

O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.

ROMEO

More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

Enter the Nurse ⌈hastily⌉





NURSE Madam.

JULIET Nurse.

NURSE

Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.

The day is broke; be wary, look about. Exit

JULIET

Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO

Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I’ll descend.

⌈He lets down the ladder of cords and goes down⌉





JULIET

Art thou gone so, love, lord, my husband, friend?

I must hear from thee every day in the hour,

For in a minute there are many days.

O, by this count I shall be much in years

Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO Farewell.

I will omit no opportunity

That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET

O, think’st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO

I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve

For sweet discourses in our times to come.

⌈JULIET⌉

O God, I have an ill-divining soul!

Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,

As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.

Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.

ROMEO

And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.

Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu. Exit

JULIET ⌈pulling up the ladder and weeping⌉

O fortune, fortune, all men call thee fickle.

If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him

That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, fortune,

For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,

But send him back.

Enter Capulet’s Wife ⌈below⌉

CAPULET’S WIFE Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET

Who is’t that calls? It is my lady mother.

Is she not down so late, or up so early?

What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?

⌈She goes down and enters below⌉





CAPULET’S WIFE

Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET Madam, I am not well.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death?

What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?

An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live,

Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love,

But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET

Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

CAPULET’S WIFE

So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend

Which you so weep for.

JULIET Feeling so the loss,

I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death

As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.

JULIET

What villain, madam?

CAPULET’S WIFE That same villain Romeo.

JULIET (aside)

Villain and he be many miles asunder.

(To her mother) God pardon him—I do, with all my

heart,

And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

CAPULET’S WIFE

That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET

Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.

Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death.

CAPULET’S WIFE

We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.

Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua,

Where that same banished runagate doth live,

Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram

That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;

And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET

Indeed, I never shall be satisfied

With Romeo till I behold him, dead,

Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexed.

Madam, if you could find out but a man

To bear a poison, I would temper it

That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,

Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors

To hear him named and cannot come to him

To wreak the love I bore my cousin

Upon his body that hath slaughtered him!

CAPULET’S WIFE

Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man.

But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET

And joy comes well in such a needy time.

What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

CAPULET’S WIFE

Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;

One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,

Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy

That thou expect’st not, nor I looked not for.

JULIET

Madam, in happy time. What day is that?

CAPULET’S WIFE

Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn

The gallant, young, and noble gentleman

The County Paris at Saint Peter’s Church

Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET

Now, by Saint Peter’s Church, and Peter too,

He shall not make me there a joyful bride.

I wonder at this haste, that I must wed

Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.

I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,

I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear

It shall be Romeo—whom you know I hate—

Rather than Paris. These are news indeed.

Enter Capulet and the Nurse





CAPULET’S WIFE

Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,

And see how he will take it at your hands.

CAPULET

When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,

But for the sunset of my brother’s son

It rains downright.

How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?

Evermore show‘ring? In one little body

Thou counterfeit’st a barque, a sea, a wind,

For still thy eyes—which I may call the sea—

Do ebb and flow with tears. The barque thy body is,

Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,

Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,

Without a sudden calm will overset

Thy tempest-tossed body.—How now, wife?

Have you delivered to her our decree?

CAPULET’S WIFE

Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.

I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET

Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.

How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?

Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,

Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought

So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?

JULIET

Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.

Proud can I never be of what I hate,

But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET

How, how, how, how—chopped logic? What is this?

‘Proud’, and ‘I thank you’, and ’I thank you not’,

And yet ‘not proud’ ? Mistress minion, you,

Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,

But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next

To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,

Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.

Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage,

You tallow-face!

CAPULET’S WIFE Fie, fie, what, are you mad?

JULIET (kneeling)

Good father, I beseech you on my knees,

Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET

Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!

I tell thee what: get thee to church o’ Thursday,

Or never after look me in the face.

Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.

⌈Juliet rises⌉





My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest

That God had lent us but this only child,

But now I see this one is one too much,

And that we have a curse in having her.

Out on her, hilding!

NURSE God in heaven bless her!

You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET

And why, my lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,

Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!

NURSE

I speak no treason.

⌈CAPULET⌉ O, God-i’-good-e’en!

⌈NURSE⌉

May not one speak?

CAPULET Peace, you mumbling fool,

Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,

For here we need it not.

CAPULET’S WIFE You are too hot.

CAPULET

God’s bread, it makes me mad. Day, night; work, play;

Alone, in company, still my care hath been

To have her matched; and having now provided

A gentleman of noble parentage,

Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly lined,

Stuffed, as they say, with honourable parts,

Proportioned as one’s thought would wish a man—

And then to have a wretched puling fool,

A whining maumet, in her fortune’s tender,

To answer ‘I’ll not wed, I cannot love;

I am too young, I pray you pardon me’!

But an you will not wed, I’ll pardon you!

Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.

Look to‘t, think on’t. I do not use to jest.

Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart. Advise.

An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend.

An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,

For, by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,

Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.

Trust to’t. Bethink you. I’ll not be forsworn. Exit

JULIET

Is there no pity sitting in the clouds

That sees into the bottom of my grief’

O sweet my mother, cast me not away!

Delay this marriage for a month, a week;

Or if you do not, make the bridal bed

In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.

Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit

JULIET

O, God—ONurse, how shall this be prevented?

My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.

How shall that faith return again to earth

Unless that husband send it me from heaven

By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.

Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems

Upon so soft a subject as myself!

What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?

Some comfort, Nurse.

NURSE Faith, here it is: Romeo

Is banished, and all the world to nothing

That he dares ne‘er come back to challenge you,

Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,

I think it best you married with the County.

O, he’s a lovely gentleman!

Romeo’s a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,

Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye

As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,

I think you are happy in this second match,

For it excels your first; or if it did not,

Your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were

As living hence and you no use of him.

JULIET Speak’st thou from thy heart?

NURSE

And from my soul, too, else beshrew them both.

JULIET Amen.

NURSE What?

JULIET

Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.

Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,

Having displeased my father, to Laurence’ cell

To make confession and to be absolved.

NURSE

Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. ⌈Exit⌉

JULIET (watching her go)

Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!

Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,

Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue

Which she hath praised him with above compare

So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!

Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.

I’ll to the friar, to know his remedy.

If all else fail, myself have power to die. Exit





4.1 Enter Friar Laurence and Paris



FRIAR LAURENCE

On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS

My father Capulet will have it so,

And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE

You say you do not know the lady’s mind?

Uneven is the course. I like it not.

PARIS

Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death,

And therefore have I little talked of love,

For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.

Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous

That she do give her sorrow so much sway,

And in his wisdom hastes our marriage

To stop the inundation of her tears,

Which, too much minded by herself alone,

May be put from her by society.

Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE (aside)

I would I knew not why it should be slowed.—

Enter Juliet





Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

PARIS

Happily met, my lady and my wife.

JULIET

That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS

That ’may be’ must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET

What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAURENCE That’s a certain text.

PARIS

Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET

To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS

Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET

I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS

So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET

If I do so, it will be of more price,

Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

PARIS

Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET

The tears have got small victory by that,

For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS

Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET

That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,

And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS

Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.

JULIET

It may be so, for it is not mine own.—

Are you at leisure, holy father, now,

Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAURENCE

My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.

My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS

God shield I should disturb devotion!—

Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.

(Kissing her) Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.

Exit

JULIET

O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,

Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAURENCE

O Juliet, I already know thy grief.

It strains me past the compass of my wits.

I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,

On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET

Tell me not, friar, that thou hear’st of this,

Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.

If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,

Do thou but call my resolution wise,

She draws a knife



And with this knife I’ll help it presently.

God joined my heart and Romeo‘s, thou our hands,

And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo’s sealed,

Shall be the label to another deed,

Or my true heart with treacherous revolt

Turn to another, this shall slay them both.

Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,

Give me some present counsel; or, behold,

’Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife

Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that

Which the commission of thy years and art

Could to no issue of true honour bring.

Be not so long to speak. I long to die

If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope

Which craves as desperate an execution

As that is desperate which we would prevent.

If, rather than to marry County Paris,

Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,

Then is it likely thou wilt undertake

A thing like death to chide away this shame,

That cop‘st with death himself to scape from it;

And, if thou dar’st, I’ll give thee remedy.

JULIET

O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,

From off the battlements of any tower,

Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk

Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,

Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,

O’ercovered quite with dead men’s rattling bones,

With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;

Or bid me go into a new-made grave

And hide me with a dead man in his tomb—

Things that, to hear them told, have made me

tremble—

And I will do it without fear or doubt,

To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent

To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.

Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone.

Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.

Take thou this vial, being then in bed,

And this distilling liquor drink thou off,

When presently through all thy veins shall run

A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse

Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.

No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.

The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade

To wanny ashes, thy eyes’ windows fall

Like death when he shuts up the day of life.

Each part, deprived of supple government,

Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;

And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death

Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,

And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.

Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes

To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.

Then, as the manner of our country is,

In thy best robes, uncovered on the bier

Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault

Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.

In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,

Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,

And hither shall he come, and he and I

Will watch thy waking, and that very night

Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.

And this shall free thee from this present shame,

If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear

Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET

Give me, give me O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAURENCE (giving her the vial)

Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous

In this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speed

To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET

Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.

Farewell, dear father. Exeunt [severally]





4.2 Enter Capulet, his Wife, the Nurse, and ⌈two⌉ Servingmen



CAPULET (giving a Servingman a paper)

So many guests invite as here are writ.

⌈Exit Servingman⌉



(To the other Servingman) Sirrah, go hire me twenty

cunning cooks.

SERVINGMAN You shall have none ill, sir, for I’ll try if they can lick their fingers.

CAPULET How canst thou try them so?

SERVINGMAN Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers, therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET Go, be gone. ⌈Exit Servingman⌉

We shall be much unfurnished for this time.

(To the Nurse) What, is my daughter gone to Friar

Laurence?

NURSE Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET

Well, he may chance to do some good on her.

A peevish, self-willed harlotry it is.

Enter Juliet





NURSE

See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET (to Juliet)

How now, my headstrong, where have you been gadding ?

JULIET

Where I have learned me to repent the sin

Of disobedient opposition

To you and your behests, and am enjoined

By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here

To beg your pardon. (Kneeling) Pardon, I beseech you.

Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET ⌈to the Nurse⌉

Send for the County; go tell him of this.

I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET

I met the youthful lord at Laurence’ cell,

And gave him what becoming love I might,

Not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET

Why, I am glad on’t. This is well. Stand up.

Juliet rises



This is as’t should be. Let me see the County.

⌈To Nurse⌉ Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.

Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,

All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET

Nurse, will you go with me into my closet

To help me sort such needful ornaments

As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

CAPULET’S WIFE

No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET

Go, Nurse, go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.

Exeunt Juliet and Nurse





CAPULET’S WIFE

We shall be short in our provision.

’Tis now near night.

CAPULET Tush, I will stir about,

And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.

Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.

I’ll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.

I’ll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!

They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself

To County Paris to prepare up him

Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light,

Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





4.3 Enter Juliet and the Nurse ⌈with garments⌉



JULIET

Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,

I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,

For I have need of many orisons

To move the heavens to smile upon my state,

Which—well thou knowest—is cross and full of sin.

Enter Capulet’s Wife





CAPULET’S WIFE

What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET

No, madam, we have culled such necessaries

As are behoveful for our state tomorrow.

So please you, let me now be left alone,

And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,

For I am sure you have your hands full all

In this so sudden business.

CAPULET’S WIFE Good night.

Get thee to bed, and rest, for thou hast need.

Exeunt Capulet’s Wife ⌈and Nurse⌉





JULIET

Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.

I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins

That almost freezes up the heat of life.

I’ll call them back again to comfort me.

Nurse!—What should she do here?

⌈She opens curtains, behind which is seen her bed⌉



My dismal scene I needs must act alone.

Come, vial. What if this mixture do not work at all?

Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?

No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

She lays down a knife



What if it be a poison which the friar

Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,

Lest in this marriage he should be dishonoured

Because he married me before to Romeo?

I fear it is—and yet methinks it should not,

For he hath still been tried a holy man.

How if, when I am laid into the tomb,

I wake before the time that Romeo

Come to redeem me? There’s a fearful point.

Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,

To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,

And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?

Or, if I live, is it not very like

The horrible conceit of death and night,

Together with the terror of the place—

As in a vault, an ancient receptacle

Where for this many hundred years the bones

Of all my buried ancestors are packed;

Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,

Lies fest‘ring in his shroud; where, as they say,

At some hours in the night spirits resort—

Alack, alack, is it not like that I,

So early waking—what with loathsome smells,

And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,

That living mortals, hearing them, run mad—

O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,

Environèd with all these hideous fears,

And madly play with my forefathers’ joints,

And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,

And, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone

As with a club dash out my desp’rate brains?

O, look! Methinks I see my cousin’s ghost

Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body

Upon a rapier’s point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!

Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here’s drink. I drink to thee.

She drinks from the vial and falls upon the bed, ⌈pulling closed the curtains⌉





4.4 Enter Capulet’s Wife, and the Nurse ⌈With herbs⌉



CAPULET’S WIFE

Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, Nurse.

NURSE

They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

Enter Capulet





CAPULET

Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.

The curfew bell hath rung. ’Tis three o’clock.

Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.

Spare not for cost.

NURSE Go, you cot-quean, go.

Get you to bed. Faith, you’ll be sick tomorrow

For this night’s watching.

CAPULET

No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now

All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,

But I will watch you from such watching now.

Exeunt Capulet’s Wife and Nurse





CAPULET

A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits and logs and baskets





Now, fellow, what is there?

FIRST SERVINGMAN

Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

CAPULET

Make haste, make haste.

Exit First Servingman ⌈and one or two others⌉



Sirrah, fetch drier logs.

Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVINGMAN

I have a head, sir, that will find out logs

And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET

Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha!

Thou shalt be loggerhead. Exit Second Servingman

Good faith, ’tis day.

The County will be here with music straight,

For so he said he would.

Music plays within





I hear him near.

Nurse! Wife! What ho, what, Nurse, I say!

Enter the Nurse



Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.

I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,

Make haste, the bridegroom he is come already.

Make haste, I say. Exit

NURSE

Mistress, what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.

Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!

Why, love, I say, madam, sweetheart, why, bride!

What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now.

Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,

The County Paris hath set up his rest

That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!

Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!

I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!

Ay, let the County take you in your bed.

He’ll fright you up, i’faith. Will it not be?

⌈She draws back the curtains⌉





What, dressed and in your clothes, and down again?

I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!

Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady’s dead.

O welladay, that ever I was born!

Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord, my lady!

Enter Capulet’s Wife





CAPULET’S WIFE

What noise is here?

NURSE O lamentable day!

CAPULET’S WIFE

What is the matter?

NURSE Look, look. O heavy day!

CAPULET’S WIFE

O me, O me, my child, my only life!

Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.

Help, help, call help!

Enter Capulet





CAPULET

For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

NURSE

She’s dead, deceased. She’s dead, alack the day!

CAPULET’S WIFE

Alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!

CAPULET

Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she’s cold.

Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.

Life and these lips have long been separated.

Death lies on her like an untimely frost

Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE

O lamentable day!

CAPULET’S WIFE O woeful time!

CAPULET

Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,

Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

Enter Friar Laurence and Paris, with Musicians

FRIAR LAURENCE

Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET

Ready to go, but never to return.

(To Paris) O son, the night before thy wedding day

Hath death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,

Flower as she was, deflowered by him.

Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir.

My daughter he hath wedded. I will die,

And leave him all. Life, living, all is death’s.

⌈Paris, Capulet and his Wife, and the Nurse all at once wring their hands and cry out together:⌉





PARIS

Have I thought long to see this morning’s face,

And doth it give me such a sight as this?

Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!

Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,

By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.

O love, O life: not life, but love in death.

CAPULET’S WIFE

Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!

Most miserable hour that e’er time saw

In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!

But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,

But one thing to rejoice and solace in,

And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!

NURSE

O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!

Most lamentable day! Most woeful day

That ever, ever, I did yet behold!

O day, O day, O day, O hateful day,

Never was seen so black a day as this I

O woeful day, O woeful day! 85

CAPULET

Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!

Uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now

To murder, murder our solemnity?

O child, O child, my soul and not my child!

Dead art thou, alack, my child is dead,

And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion’s cure lives not

In these confusions. Heaven and yourself

Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,

And all the better is it for the maid.

Your part in her you could not keep from death,

But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.

The most you sought was her promotion,

For ’twas your heaven she should be advanced,

And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced

Above the clouds as high as heaven itself?

O, in this love you love your child so ill

That you run mad, seeing that she is well.

She’s not well married that lives married long,

But she’s best married that dies married young.

Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary

On this fair corpse, and, as the custom is,

All in her best array bear her to church;

For though fond nature bids us all lament,

Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.

CAPULET

All things that we ordained festival

Turn from their office to black funeral.

Our instruments to melancholy bells,

Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,

Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;

Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corpse,

And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Sir, go you in; and madam, go with him,

And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare

To follow this fair corpse unto her grave.

The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.

Move them no more by crossing their high will.

⌈They cast rosemary on Juliet, and shut the curtains.⌉ Exeunt all but the Nurse and Musicians





⌈FIRST⌉ MUSICIAN Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE

Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,

For well you know this is a pitiful case.

⌈FIRST⌉ MUSICIAN

Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

Exit Nurse Enter Peter





PETER Musicians, O, musicians! ‘Heart’s ease’, ‘Heart’s ease’; O,an you will have me live, play ‘Heart’s ease’.

⌈FIRST⌉ MUSICIAN Why ‘Heart’s ease’?

PETER O, musicians, because my heart itself plays ‘My heart is full of woe’. O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.

⌈FIRST⌉ MUSICIAN Not a dump, we. ’Tis no time to play now.

PETER You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN No.

PETER I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN What will you give us?

PETER No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN Then will I give you the serving-creature.

PETER (drawing his dagger) Then will I lay the serving-creature’s dagger on your pate. I will carry no crochets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN An you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN Pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.

⌈PETER⌉ Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.

⌈Sings⌉





When griping grief the heart doth wound,

And doleful dumps the mind oppress,

Then music with her silver sound—





Why ‘silver sound’, why ‘music with her silver sound’?

What say you, Matthew Minikin?

FIRST MUSICIAN Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER Prates! What say you, Hugh Rebec?

SECOND MUSICIAN I say ’silver sound’ because musicians sound for silver.

PETER Prates too! What say you, Simon Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is ’music with her silver sound’ because musicians have no gold for sounding.

⌈Sings⌉





Then music with her silver sound

With speedy help doth lend redress. Exit





FIRST MUSICIAN What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN Hang him, jack! Come, we’ll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner. Exeunt





5.1 Enter Romeo



ROMEO

If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,

My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.

My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne,

And all this day an unaccustomed spirit

Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.

I dreamt my lady came and found me dead—

Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to

think!—

And breathed such life with kisses in my lips

That I revived and was an emperor.

Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed

When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy!

Enter Balthasar, Romeo’s man, ⌈booted⌉



News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?

Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?

How doth my lady? Is my father well?

How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,

For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR

Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.

Her body sleeps in Capel’s monument,

And her immortal part with angels lives.

I saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault,

And presently took post to tell it you.

O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,

Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO

Is it e’en so? Then I defy you, stars.

Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,

And hire posthorses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR

I do beseech you, sir, have patience.

Your looks are pale and wild, and do import

Some misadventure.

ROMEO Tush, thou art deceived.

Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.

Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

BALTHASAR

No, my good lord.

ROMEO No matter. Get thee gone,

And hire those horses. I’ll be with thee straight.

Exit Balthasar



Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.

Let’s see for means. O mischief, thou art swift

To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!

I do remember an apothecary,

And hereabouts a dwells, which late I noted,

In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,

Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks.

Sharp misery had worn him to the bones,

And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,

An alligator stuffed, and other skins

Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves

A beggarly account of empty boxes,

Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,

Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses

Were thinly scattered to make up a show.

Noting this penury, to myself I said

‘An if a man did need a poison now,

Whose sale is present death in Mantua,

Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.’

O, this same thought did but forerun my need,

And this same needy man must sell it me.

As I remember, this should be the house.

Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut.

What ho, apothecary!

Enter Apothecary





APOTHECARY Who calls so loud?

ROMEO

Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.

He offers money



Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have

A dram of poison—such soon-speeding gear

As will disperse itself through all the veins,

That the life-weary taker may fall dead,

And that the trunk may be discharged of breath

As violently as hasty powder fired

Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.

APOTHECARY

Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s law

Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO

Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,

And fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,

Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,

Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.

The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law.

The world affords no law to make thee rich.

Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

APOTHECARY

My poverty but not my will consents.

ROMEO

I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

APOTHECARY (handing Romeo poison)

Put this in any liquid thing you will

And drink it off, and if you had the strength

Of twenty men it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO (giving money)

There is thy gold—worse poison to men’s souls, 80

Doing more murder in this loathsome world,

Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.

I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.

Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.

⌈Exit Apothecary⌉



Come, cordial and not poison, go with me 85

To Juliet’s grave, for there must I use thee. Exit





5.2 Enter Friar John at one door



FRIAR JOHN

Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

Enter Friar Laurence at another door





FRIAR LAURENCE

This same should be the voice of Friar John.

Welcome from Mantua! What says Romeo?

Or if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN

Going to find a barefoot brother out—5

One of our order—to associate me

Here in this city visiting the sick,

And finding him, the searchers of the town,

Suspecting that we both were in a house

Where the infectious pestilence did reign, 10

Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth,

So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Who bare my letter then to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN

I could not send it—here it is again—

Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,

So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Unhappy fortuneǃ By my brotherhood,

The letter was not nice, but full of charge,

Of dear import, and the neglecting it

May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.

Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight

Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee. Exit

FRIAR LAURENCE

Now must I to the monument alone.

Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.

She will beshrew me much that Romeo

Hath had no notice of these accidents.

But I will write again to Mantua,

And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.

Poor living corpse, closed in a dead man’s tomb! Exit





5.3 Enter Paris and his Page, with flowers, sweet water, and a torch



PARIS

Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.

Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.

⌈His Page puts out the torch⌉





Under yon yew trees lay thee all along,

Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.

So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, 5

Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,

But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me

As signal that thou hear’st something approach.

Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.

PAGE ⌈aside⌉

I am almost afraid to stand alone 10

Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure.

He hides himself at a distance from Paris





PARIS (strewing flowers)

Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.

He sprinkles water



O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones,

Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,

Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.

The obsequies that I for thee will keep

Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.

The Page whistles



The boy gives warning. Something doth approach.

What cursed foot wanders this way tonight

To cross my obsequies and true love’s rite? 20

Enter Romeo and ⌈Balthasar⌉ his man, with a torch, a mattock, and a crow of iron



What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, a while.

He stands aside

ROMEO

Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.

Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning

See thou deliver it to my lord and father.

Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee, 25

Whate’er thou hear’st or seest, stand all aloof,

And do not interrupt me in my course.

Why I descend into this bed of death

Is partly to behold my lady’s face,

But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger

A precious ring, a ring that I must use

In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.

But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry

In what I farther shall intend to do,

By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint,

And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.

The time and my intents are savage-wild,

More fierce and more inexorable far

Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

⌈BALTHASAR⌉

I will be gone, sir, and not trouble ye. 40

ROMEO

So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.

He gives money



Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

⌈BALTHASAR⌉ (aside)

For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout. His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

He hides himself at a distance from Romeo. ⌈Romeo begins to jorce open the tombs⌉





ROMEO

Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,

Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,

Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

And in despite I’ll cram thee with more food.

PARIS (aside)

This is that banished haughty Montague

That murdered my love’s cousin, with which grief

It is supposed the fair creature died;

And here is come to do some villainous shame

To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.

⌈Drawing⌉ Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!

Can vengeance be pursued further than death? 55

Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.

Obey and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO

I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.

Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp’rate man.

Fly hence, and leave me. Think upon these gone. 60

Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,

Put not another sin upon my head

By urging me to fury. O, be gone.

By heaven, I love thee better than myself,

For I come hither armed against myself. 65

Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say

A madman’s mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS

I do defy thy conjuration,

And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO (drawing)

Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy. 70

They fight





⌈PAGE⌉

O Lord, they fight! I I will go call the watch. Exit

PARIS

O, I am slainǃ If thou be merciful,

Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

ROMEO

In faith, I will. Paris dies

Let me peruse this face.

Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris! 75

What said my man when my betossèd soul

Did not attend him as we rode? I think

He told me Paris should have married Juliet.

Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?

Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, 80

To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,

One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book.

I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave.

⌈Heopens the tomb, revealing Juliet⌉



A grave—O no, a lantern, slaughtered youth,

For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes

This vault a feasting presence full of light.

⌈He bears the body of Paris to the tombs⌉



Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.

How oft, when men are at the point of death,

Have they been merry, which their keepers call

A lightning before death! O, how may I 90

Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife!

Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,

Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.

Thou art not conquered. Beauty’s ensign yet

Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,

And death’s pale flag is not advanced there.

Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?

O, what more favour can I do to thee

Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain

To sunder his that was thine enemy?

Forgive me, cousin. Ah, dear Juliet,

Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe

That unsubstantial death is amorous,

And that the lean abhorred monster keeps

Thee here in dark to be his paramour? 105

For fear of that I still will stay with thee,

And never from this pallet of dim night

Depart again. Here, here will I remain

With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here

Will I set up my everlasting rest, 110

And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars

From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last.

Arms, take your last embrace, and lips, O you

The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss

A dateless bargain to engrossing death.

⌈He kisses Juliet, then pours poison into the cup⌉



Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide,

Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on

The dashing rocks thy seasick weary barque!

Here’s to my love.

He drinks the poison



O true apothecary,

Thy drugs are quick! Thus with a kiss I die.

He kisses Juliet, falls, and dies.



Enter Friar Laurence with lantern, crow, and spade





FRIAR LAURENCE

Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight

Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Who’s there?

BALTHASAR

Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,

What torch is yon that vainly lends his light 125

To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,

It burneth in the Capels’ monument.

BALTHASAR

It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master,

One that you love.

FRIAR LAURENCE Who is it?

BALTHASAR Romeo.

FRIAR LAURENCE

How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR I dare not, sir.

My master knows not but I am gone hence,

And fearfully did menace me with death

If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAURENCE

Stay then, I’ll go alone. Fear comes upon me. 135

O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.

BALTHASAR

As I did sleep under this yew tree here

I dreamt my master and another fought,

And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAURENCE Romeo!

He ⌈stoops and⌉ looks on the blood and weapons





Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains 140

The stony entrance of this sepulchre?

What mean these masterless and gory swords

To lie discoloured by this place of peace?

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris, too,

And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour

Is guilty of this lamentable chance I

Juliet awakes ⌈and rises⌉



The lady stirs.

JULIET

O comfortable friar, where is my lord?

I do remember well where I should be,

And there I am. Where is my Romeo? 150

FRIAR LAURENCE

I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest

Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.

A greater power than we can contradict

Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.

Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, 155

And Paris, too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee

Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.

Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.

Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay. Exit

JULIET

Go, get thee hence, for I will not away. 160

What’s here? A cup closed in my true love’s hand?

Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.

O churt!—drunk all, and left no friendly drop

To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.

Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,

To make me die with a restorative.

She kisses Romeo’s lips



Thy lips are warm.

CHIEF WATCHMAN ⌈within⌉ Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET

Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief.

She takes Romeo’s dagger



O happy dagger,

This is thy sheath! There rust, and let me die.

She stabs herself, falls, and dies.



Enter the Page and Watchmen





⌈PAGE⌉

This is the place, there where the torch doth burn. 170

CHIEF WATCHMAN

The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.

Go, some of you. Whoe’er you find, attach.

Exeunt some Watchmen



Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,

And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,

Who here hath lain this two days buried.

Go tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets,

Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.

Exeunt other Watchmen ⌈severally⌉



We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,

But the true ground of all these piteous woes

We cannot without circumstance descry.

Enter ⌈Watchmen⌉ with Balthasar





⌈SECOND⌉ WATCHMAN

Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.

CHIEF WATCHMAN



Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

Enter another Watchman with Friar Laurence





THIRD WATCHMAN

Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.

We took this mattock and this spade from him

As he was coming from this churchyard’s side.

CHIEF WATCHMAN

A great suspicion. Stay the friar, too.

Enter the Prince ⌈with others⌉





PRINCE

What misadventure is so early up,

That calls our person from our morning rest?

Enter Capulet and his Wife





CAPULET

What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?

CAPULET’S WIFE

O, the people in the street cry ‘Romeo’,

Some ‘Juliet’, and some ‘Paris’, and all run

With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE

What fear is this which startles in our ears?

CHIEF WATCHMAN

Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,

And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,

Warm, and new killed.

PRINCE

Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

CHIEF WATCHMAN

Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo’s man,

With instruments upon them fit to open

These dead men’s tombs.

CAPULET

O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!

This dagger hath mista’en, for lo, his house

Is empty on the back of Montague,

And it mis-sheathèd in my daughter’s bosom.

CAPULET’S WIFE

O me, this sight of death is as a bell 205

That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

Enter Montague





PRINCE

Come, Montague, for thou art early up

To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE

Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.

Grief of my son’s exile hath stopped her breath. 210

What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE (seeing Romeo’s body)

O thou untaught! What manners is in this,

To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE

Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, 215

Till we can clear these ambiguities

And know their spring, their head, their true descent;

And then will I be general of your woes,

And lead you even to death. Meantime, forbear,

And let mischance be slave to patience. 220

Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAURENCE

I am the greatest, able to do least,

Yet most suspected, as the time and place

Doth make against me, of this direful murder;

And here I stand, both to impeach and purge

Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE

Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAURENCE

I will be brief, for my short date of breath

Is not so long as is a tedious tale.

Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,

And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife.

I married them, and their stol’n marriage day

Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death

Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,

For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.

You, to remove that siege of grief from her,

Betrothed and would have married her perforce

To County Paris. Then comes she to me,

And with wild looks bid me devise some mean

To rid her from this second marriage,

Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

Then gave I her—so tutored by my art—

A sleeping potion, which so took effect

As I intended, for it wrought on her

The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo

That he should hither come as this dire night

To help to take her from her borrowed grave,

Being the time the potion’s force should cease.

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,

Was stayed by accident, and yesternight 250

Returned my letter back. Then all alone,

At the prefixèd hour of her waking,

Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault,

Meaning to keep her closely at my cell

Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.

But when I came, some minute ere the time

Of her awakening, here untimely lay

The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.

She wakes, and I entreated her come forth

And bear this work of heaven with patience. 260

But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,

And she, too desperate, would not go with me,

But, as it seems, did violence on herself.

All this I know, and to the marriage

Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this

Miscarried by my fault, let my old life

Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,

Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE

We still have known thee for a holy man.

Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say to this? 270

BALTHASAR

I brought my master news of Juliet’s death,

And then in post he came from Mantua

To this same place, to this same monument.

This letter he early bid me give his father,

And threatened me with death, going in the vault,

If I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE

Give me the letter. I will look on it.

He takes the letter



Where is the County’s page that raised the watch?

Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE

He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave,

And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.

Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,

And by and by my master drew on him,

And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE

This letter doth make good the friar’s words,

Their course of love, the tidings of her death;

And here he writes that he did buy a poison

Of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal

Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.

Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague, 290

See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,

That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.

And I, for winking at your discords, too

Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.

CAPULET

O brother Montague, give me thy hand. 295

This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more

Can I demand.

MONTAGUE But I can give thee more,

For I will raise her statue in pure gold,

That whiles Verona by that name is known

There shall no figure at such rate be set 300

As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET

As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,

Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE

A glooming peace this morning with it brings.

The sun for sorrow will not show his head. 305

Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things.

Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd;

For never was a story of more woe

Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

⌈The tomb is closed.⌉ Exeunt



