The Tragedy of King Lear





1.1 Enter the Earl of Kent, the Duke of Gloucester, and Edmond



KENT I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.

GLOUCESTER) It did always seem so to us, but now in the division of the kingdom it appears not which of the Dukes he values most; for qualities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.

KENT Is not this your son, my lord?

GLOUCESTER His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazed to’t.

KENT I cannot conceive you.

GLOUCESTER Sir, this young fellow’s mother could, whereupon she grew round-wombed and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?

KENT I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.

GLOUCESTER But I have a son, sir, by order of law, some year older than this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came something saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged. (To Edmond) Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmond?

EDMOND No, my lord.

GLOUCESTER (to Edmond) My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.

EDMOND (to Kent) My services to your lordship.

KENT I must love you, and sue to know you better.

EDMOND Sir, I shall study deserving.

GLOUCESTER (to Kent) He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.

Sennet





The King is coming.

Enter King Lear, the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, and attendants





LEAR

Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER I shall, my lord. Exit

LEAR

Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.

Give me the map there. Know that we have divided

In three our kingdom, and ’tis our fast intent

To shake all cares and business from our age,

Conferring them on younger strengths while we

Unburdened crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,

And you, our no less loving son of Albany,

We have this hour a constant will to publish

Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife

May be prevented now. The princes France and

Burgundy—

Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love—

Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,

And here are to be answered. Tell me, my daughters—

Since now we will divest us both of rule,

Interest of territory, cares of state—

Which of you shall we say doth love us most,

That we our largest bounty may extend

Where nature doth with merit challenge? Goneril,

Our eldest born, speak first.

GONERIL

Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;

Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;

Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,

No less than life; with grace, health, beauty, honour;

As much as child e’er loved or father found;

A love that makes breath poor and speech unable.

Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

CORDELIA (aside)

What shall Cordelia speak? Love and be silent.

LEAR (to Goneril)

Of all these bounds even from this line to this,

With shadowy forests and with champaigns riched,

With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,

We make thee lady. To thine and Albany’s issues

Be this perpetual.—What says our second daughter?

Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall?

REGAN

I am made of that self mettle as my sister,

And prize me at her worth. In my true heart

I find she names my very deed of love—

Only she comes too short, that I profess

Myself an enemy to all other joys

Which the most precious square of sense possesses,

And find I am alone felicitate

In your dear highness’ love.

CORDELIA (aside) Then poor Cordelia—

And yet not so, since I am sure my love’s

More ponderous than my tongue.

LEAR (to Regan)

To thee and thine hereditary ever

Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,

No less in space, validity, and pleasure

Than that conferred on Goneril. (To Cordelia) Now our

joy,

Although our last and least, to whose young love

The vines of France and milk of Burgundy

Strive to be interessed: what can you say to draw

A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.

CORDELIA Nothing, my lord.

LEAR Nothing?

CORDELIA Nothing.

LEAR

Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.

CORDELIA

Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave

My heart into my mouth. I love your majesty

According to my bond, no more nor less.

LEAR

How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little

Lest you may mar your fortunes.

CORDELIA

Good my lord,

You have begot me, bred me, loved me.

I return those duties back as are right fit-

Obey you, love you, and most honour you.

Why have my sisters husbands if they say

They love you all? Haply when I shall wed

That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry

Half my love with him, half my care and duty.

Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters.

LEAR But goes thy heart with this?

CORDELIA Ay, my good lord.

LEAR So young and so untender?

CORDELIA So young, my lord, and true.

LEAR

Let it be so. Thy truth then be thy dower;

For by the sacred radiance of the sun,

The mysteries of Hecate and the night,

By all the operation of the orbs

From whom we do exist and cease to be,

Here I disclaim all my paternal care,

Propinquity, and property of blood,

And as a stranger to my heart and me

Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,

Or he that makes his generation messes

To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom

Be as well neighboured, pitied, and relieved

As thou, my sometime daughter.

KENT

Good my liege—

LEAR Peace, Kent.

Come not between the dragon and his wrath.

I loved her most, and thought to set my rest

On her kind nursery. ⌈To Cordelia⌉ Hence, and avoid

my sight!—

So be my grave my peace as here I give

Her father’s heart from her. Call France. Who stirs?

Call Burgundy.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

Cornwall and Albany,





With my two daughters’ dowers digest the third.

Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.

I do invest you jointly with my power,

Pre-eminence, and all the large effects

That troop with majesty. Ourself by monthly course,

With reservation of an hundred knights

By you to be sustained, shall our abode

Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain

The name and all th’addition to a king. The sway,

Revenue, execution of the rest,

Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,

This crownet part between you.

KENT

Royal Lear,

Whom I have ever honoured as my king,

Loved as my father, as my master followed,

As my great patron thought on in my prayers—

LEAR

The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

KENT

Let it fall rather, though the fork invade

The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly

When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?

Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak

When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour’s

bound

When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,

And in thy best consideration check

This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgement,

Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,

Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sounds

Reverb no hollowness.

LEAR

Kent, on thy life, no more!

KENT

My life I never held but as a pawn

To wage against thine enemies, ne’er feared to lose it,

Thy safety being motive.

LEAR

Out of my sight!

KENT

See better, Lear, and let me still remain

The true blank of thine eye.

LEAR

Now, by Apollo—

KENT

Now, by Apollo, King, thou swear’st thy gods in vain.

LEAR ⌈making to strike him⌉

O vassal! Miscreant!

ALBANY and ⌈CORDELIA⌉ Dear sir, forbear.

KENT (to Lear)

Kill thy physician, and thy fee bestow

Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,

Or whilst I can vent clamour from my throat

I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.

LEAR

Hear me, recreant; on thine allegiance hear me!

That thou hast sought to make us break our vows,

Which we durst never yet, and with strained pride

To come betwixt our sentence and our power,

Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,

Our potency made good take thy reward:

Five days we do allot thee for provision

To shield thee from disasters of the world,

And on the sixth to turn thy hated back

Upon our kingdom. If on the seventh day following

Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,

The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,

This shall not be revoked.

KENT

Fare thee well, King; sith thus thou wilt appear,

Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.

(To Cordelia) The gods to their dear shelter take thee,

maid,

That justly think’st, and hast most rightly said.

(To Goneril and Regan) And your large speeches may

your deeds approve,

That good effects may spring from words of love.

Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;

He’ll shape his old course in a country new. Exit

Flourish. Enter the Duke of Gloucester with the



King of France, the Duke of Burgundy, and attendants





⌈CORDELIA⌉

Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

LEAR My lord of Burgundy,

We first address toward you, who with this King

Hath rivalled for our daughter: what in the least

Will you require in present dower with her

Or cease your quest of love?

BURGUNDY

Most royal majesty,

I crave no more than hath your highness offered;

Nor will you tender less.

LEAR

Right noble Burgundy,

When she was dear to us we did hold her so;

But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands.

If aught within that little seeming substance,

Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,

And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,

She’s there, and she is yours.

BURGUNDY

I know no answer.

LEAR

Will you with those infirmities she owes,

Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,

Dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath,

Take her or leave her?

BURGUNDY

Pardon me, royal sir.

Election makes not up in such conditions.

LEAR

Then leave her, sir; for by the power that made me,

I tell you all her wealth. (To France) For you, great King,

I would not from your love make such a stray

To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you

T‘avert your liking a more worthier way

Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed

Almost t’acknowledge hers.

FRANCE

This is most strange,

That she whom even but now was your best object,

The argument of your praise, balm of your age,

The best, the dear’st, should in this trice of time

Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle

So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence

Must be of such unnatural degree

That monsters it, or your fore-vouched affection

Fall into taint; which to believe of her

Must be a faith that reason without miracle

Should never plant in me.

CORDELIA (to Lear)

I yet beseech your majesty,

If for I want that glib and oily art

To speak and purpose not—since what I well intend,

I’ll do’t before I speak—that you make known

It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,

No unchaste action or dishonoured step

That hath deprived me of your grace and favour,

But even the want of that for which I am richer—

A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue

That I am glad I have not, though not to have it

Hath lost me in your liking.

LEAR

Better thou

Hadst not been born than not t’have pleased me better.

FRANCE

Is it but this—a tardiness in nature,

Which often leaves the history unspoke

That it intends to do?—My lord of Burgundy,

What say you to the lady? Love’s not love

When it is mingled with regards that stands

Aloof from th’entire point. Will you have her?

She is herself a dowry.

BURGUNDY (to Lear) Royal King,

Give but that portion which yourself proposed,

And here I take Cordelia by the hand,

Duchess of Burgundy.

LEAR Nothing. I have sworn. I am firm.

BURGUNDY (to Cordelia)

I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father

That you must lose a husband.

CORDELIA

Peace be with Burgundy;

Since that respect and fortunes are his love,

I shall not be his wife.

FRANCE

Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;

Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised:

Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.

Be it lawful, I take up what’s cast away.

Gods, gods! ‘Tis strange that from their cold’st neglect

My love should kindle to inflamed respect.—

Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,

Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.

Not all the dukes of wat’rish Burgundy

Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.—

Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.

Thou losest here, a better where to find.

LEAR

Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we

Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see

That face of hers again. Therefore be gone,

Without our grace, our love, our benison.—

Come, noble Burgundy. Flourish. Exeunt all but France

and the sisters

FRANCE Bid farewell to your sisters.

CORDELIA

Ye jewels of our father, with washed eyes

Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,

And like a sister am most loath to call

Your faults as they are named. Love well our father.

To your professed bosoms I commit him.

But yet, alas, stood I within his grace

I would prefer him to a better place.

So farewell to you both.

REGAN Prescribe not us our duty.

GONERIL Let your study

Be to content your lord, who hath received you

At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted,

And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

CORDELIA

Time shall unfold what pleated cunning hides,

Who covert faults at last with shame derides.

Well may you prosper.

FRANCE

Come, my fair Cordelia.

Exeunt France and Cordelia

GONERIL Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.

REGAN That’s most certain, and with you. Next month with us.

GONERIL You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we have made of it hath been little. He always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgement he hath now cast her off appears too grossly.

REGAN ’Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.

GONERIL The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.

REGAN Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s banishment.

GONERIL There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and him. Pray you, let us sit together. If our father carry authority with such disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.

REGAN We shall further think of it. GONERIL We must do something, and i’th’ heat.

Exeunt





1.2 Enter Edmond the bastard



EDMOND

Thou, nature, art my goddess. To thy law

My services are bound. Wherefore should I

Stand in the plague of custom and permit

The curiosity of nations to deprive me

For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines

Lag of a brother? Why ‘bastard’? Wherefore ‘base’,

When my dimensions are as well compact,

My mind as generous, and my shape as true

As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us

With ‘base’, with ‘baseness, bastardy—base, base’—

Who in the lusty stealth of nature take

More composition and fierce quality

Than doth within a dull, stale, tirèd bed

Go to th’ creating a whole tribe of fops

Got ‘tween a sleep and wake? Well then,

Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.

Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmond

As to th’ legitimate. Fine word, ‘legitimate’.

Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed

And my invention thrive, Edmond the base

Shall to th’ legitimate. I grow, I prosper.

Now gods, stand up for bastards!

Enter the Duke of Gloucester. Edmond reads a letter

GLOUCESTER

Kent banished thus, and France in choler parted,

And the King gone tonight, prescribed his power,

Confined to exhibition—all this done

Upon the gad?—Edmond, how now? What news?

EDMOND So please your lordship, none.

GLOUCESTER Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?

EDMOND I know no news, my lord. GLOUCESTER What paper were you reading?

EDMOND Nothing, my lord.

GLOUCESTER No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come, if it be nothing I shall not need spectacles.

EDMOND I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother that I have not all o‘er-read; and for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o’erlooking. GLOUCESTER Give me the letter, sir.

EDMOND I shall offend either to detain or give it. The contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame. GLOUCESTER Let’s see, let’s see.

EDMOND I hope for my brother’s justification he wrote this but as an assay or taste of my virtue.

He gives Gloucester a letter





GLOUCESTER (reads) ‘This policy and reverence of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever and live the beloved of your brother,

Edgar.’

Hum, conspiracy! ‘Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half his revenue’—my son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this, a heart and brain to breed it in? When came you to this? Who brought it?

EDMOND It was not brought me, my lord, there’s the cunning of it. I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

GLOUCESTER You know the character to be your brother’s?

EDMOND If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his; but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not. GLOUCESTER) It is his.

EDMOND It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is not in the contents.

GLOUCESTER Has he never before sounded you in this business?

EDMOND Never, my lord; but I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.

GLOUCESTER O villain, villain—his very opinion in the letter! Abhorred villain, unnatural, detested, brutish villain—worse than brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I’ll apprehend him. Abominable villain! Where is he?

EDMOND I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course; where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no other pretence of danger.

GLOUCESTER Think you so?

EDMOND If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very evening.

GLOUCESTER He cannot be such a monster. Edmond, seek him out, wind me into him, I pray you. Frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.

EDMOND I will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business as I shall find means, and acquaint you withal.

GLOUCESTER These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide; in cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked ‘twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the prediction: there’s son against father. The King falls from bias of nature: there’s father against child. We have seen the best of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out this villain, Edmond; it shall lose thee nothing. Do it carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished, his offence honesty! ’Tis strange.

Exit

EDMOND This is the excellent foppery of the world: that when we are sick in fortune—often the surfeits of our own behaviour—we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and stars, as if we were villains on necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whore-master man, to lay his goatish disposition on the charge of a star! My father compounded with my mother under the Dragon’s tail and my nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.

Enter Edgar





Pat he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’ Bedlam.

⌈He reads a book⌉





—O, these eclipses do portend these divisions. Fa, so, la, mi.

EDGAR How now, brother Edmond, what serious contemplation are you in?

EDMOND I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.

EDGAR Do you busy yourself with that?

EDMOND I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily. When saw you my father last?

EDGAR The night gone by.

EDMOND Spake you with him?

EDGAR Ay, two hours together.

EDMOND Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by word nor countenance?

EDGAR None at all.

EDMOND Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him, and at my entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would scarcely allay.

EDGAR Some villain hath done me wrong.

EDMOND That’s my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak. Pray ye, go. There’s my key. If you do stir abroad, go armed.

EDGAR Armed, brother?

EDMOND Brother, I advise you to the best. I am no honest man if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I have seen and heard but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. Pray you, away.

EDGAR Shall I hear from you anon?

EDMOND I do serve you in this business.

Exit Edgar

A credulous father, and a brother noble,

Whose nature is so far from doing harms

That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty

My practices ride easy. I see the business.

Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit.

All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.

Exit





1.3 Enter Goneril and Oswald, her steward GONERIL



Did my father strike my gentleman

For chiding of his fool?

OSWALD Ay, madam.

GONERIL

By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour

He flashes into one gross crime or other

That sets us all at odds. I’ll not endure it.

His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us

On every trifle. When he returns from hunting

I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.

If you come slack of former services

You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer.

⌈Horns within⌉





OSWALD He’s coming, madam. I hear him.

GONERIL

Put on what weary negligence you please,

You and your fellows. I’d have it come to question.

If he distaste it, let him to my sister,

Whose mind and mine I know in that are one.

Remember what I have said.

OSWALD Well, madam.

GONERI,

And let his knights have colder looks among you.

What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.

I’ll write straight to my sister to hold my course.

Prepare for dinner.

Exeunt severally





1.4 Enter the Earl of Kent, disguised



KENT

If but as well I other accents borrow

That can my speech diffuse, my good intent

May carry through itself to that full issue

For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent,

If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned,

So may it come thy master, whom thou lov’st,

Shall find thee full of labours.

Horns within. Enter King Lear and attendants from hunting





LEAR Let me not stay a jot for dinner. Go get it ready.

⌈Exit one⌉

(To Kent) How now, what art thou?

KENT A man, sir.

LEAR What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?

KENT I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgement, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.

LEAR What art thou?

KENT A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

LEAR If thou be‘st as poor for a subject as he’s for a king, thou’rt poor enough. What wouldst thou?

KENT Service.

LEAR Who wouldst thou serve?

KENT You.

LEAR Dost thou know me, fellow?

KENT No, sir, but you have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.

LEAR What’s that?

KENT Authority.

LEAR What services canst do?

KENT I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which ordinary men are fit for I am qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.

LEAR How old art thou?

KENT Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.

LEAR Follow me. Thou shalt serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner. I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave, my fool? Go you and call my fool hither. ⌈Exit one⌉

Enter Oswald the steward



You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?



OSWALD So please you—



Exit



LEAR What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.



Exit a knight



Where’s my fool? Ho, I think the world’s asleep.



Enter a Knight





How now? Where’s that mongrel?



KNIGHT He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.



LEAR Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?



KNIGHT Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner he would not.



LEAR A would not?



KNIGHT My lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgement your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont. There’s a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also, and your daughter.



LEAR Ha, sayst thou so?



KNIGHT I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.



LEAR Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception. I have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into’t. But where’s my fool? I have not seen him these two days.



KNIGHT Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much pined away.



LEAR No more of that, I have noted it well. Go you and tell my daughter I would speak with her. ⌈Exit one⌉ Go you, call hither my fool. ⌈Exit one⌉



Enter Oswald the steward ⌈crossing the stage⌉





O you, sir, you, come you hither, sir, who am I, sir? OSWALD My lady’s father.



LEAR My lady’s father? My lord’s knave, you whoreson dog, you slave, you cur!



OSWALD I am none of these, my lord, I beseech your pardon.



LEAR Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?



⌈Lear strikes him⌉





OSWALD I’ll not be strucken, my lord.



KENT ⌈tripping him⌉ Nor tripped neither, you base football player.



LEAR (to Kent) I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv’st me, and



I’ll love thee.



KENT (to Oswald) Come, sir, arise, away. I’ll teach you differences. Away, away. If you will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry; but away, go to. Have you wisdom? So. Exit Oswald



LEAR Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee.



Enter Lear’s Fool





There’s earnest of thy service.



He gives Kent money





FOOL Let me hire him, too. (To Kent) Here’s my coxcomb.



LEAR How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?



FOOL (to Kent) Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.



LEAR Why, my boy?



FOOL Why? For taking one’s part that’s out of favour. (To Kent) Nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch cold shortly. There, take my coxcomb. Why, this fellow has banished two on’s daughters and did the third a blessing against his will. If thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. (To Lear) How now, nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters.



LEAR Why, my boy?



FOOL If I gave them all my living I’d keep my coxcombs myself. There’s mine; beg another off thy daughters.



LEAR Take heed, sirrah—the whip.



FOOL Truth’s a dog must to kennel. He must be whipped out when the Lady Brach may stand by th’ fire and stink.



LEAR A pestilent gall to me!



FOOL ⌈to Kent⌉ Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.



LEAR Do.



FOOL Mark it, nuncle:



Have more than thou showest,

Speak less than thou knowest,

Lend less than thou owest,

Ride more than thou goest,

Learn more than thou trowest,

Set less than thou throwest,

Leave thy drink and thy whore,

And keep in-a-door,

And thou shalt have more

Than two tens to a score.





KENT This is nothing, fool.



FOOL Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer: you gave me nothing for’t. (To Lear) Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?



LEAR Why no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.



FOOL (to Kent) Prithee, tell him so much the rent of his land comes to. He will not believe a fool.



LEAR A bitter fool.



FOOL Dost know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet one?



LEAR No, lad. Teach me.



FOOL Nuncle, give me an egg, and I’ll give thee two crowns.



LEAR What two crowns shall they be?



FOOL Why, after I have cut the egg i‘th’ middle and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i’th’ middle and gavest away both parts, thou borest thine ass o‘th’ back o’er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so. ⌈Sings⌉ Fools had ne’er less grace in a year,



For wise men are grown foppish,





And know not how their wits to wear,





Their manners are so apish.





LEAR When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?



FOOL I have used it, nuncle, e’er since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers; for when thou gavest them the rod and puttest down thine own breeches, ⌈Sings⌉ Then they for sudden joy did weep,



And I for sorrow sung,





That such a king should play bo-peep





And go the fools among.





Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie. I would fain learn to lie.



LEAR An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.



FOOL I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou‘lt have me whipped for lying, and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind o’ thing than a fool; and yet I would not be thee, nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o’ both sides and left nothing i’th’ middle.



Enter Goneril





Here comes one o’ the parings.



LEAR



How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on?

You are too much of late i’th’ frown.



FOOL Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better than thou art, now. I am a fool; thou art nothing. ⌈To Goneril⌉ Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; so your face bids me, though you say nothing.



⌈Sings⌉ Mum, mum.



He that keeps nor crust nor crumb,

Weary of all, shall want some.





That’s a shelled peascod.



GONERIL (to Lear)



Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,

But other of your insolent retinue

Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth

In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,

I had thought by making this well known unto you

To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,

By what yourself too late have spoke and done,

That you protect this course, and put it on

By your allowance; which if you should, the fault

Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep

Which in the tender of a wholesome weal

Might in their working do you that offence,

Which else were shame, that then necessity

Will call discreet proceeding.



FOOL (to Lear) For, you know, nuncle,



⌈Sings⌉ The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long

That it’s had it head bit off by it young;

so out went the candle, and we were left darkling.



LEAR (to Goneril) Are you our daughter?



GONERIL



I would you would make use of your good wisdom,

Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away

These dispositions which of late transport you

From what you rightly are.



FOOL May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? ⌈Sings⌉ ‘Whoop, jug, I love thee!’



LEAR



Does any here know me? This is not Lear.

Does Lear walk thus, speak thus? Where are his eyes?

Either his notion weakens, his discernings

Are lethargied—ha, waking? ’Tis not so.

Who is it that can tell me who I am?



FOOL Lear’s shadow.



LEAR (to Goneril) Your name, fair gentlewoman?



GONERIL



This admiration, sir, is much o’th’ savour

Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you

To understand my purposes aright,

As you are old and reverend, should be wise.

Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,

Men so disordered, so debauched and bold

That this our court, infected with their manners,

Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust

Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel

Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak

For instant remedy. Be then desired,

By her that else will take the thing she begs,

A little to disquantity your train,

And the remainders that shall still depend

To be such men as may besort your age,

Which know themselves and you.



LEAR Darkness and devils!



Saddle my horses, call my train together!—



⌈Exit one or more⌉



Degenerate bastard, I’ll not trouble thee.

Yet have I left a daughter.



GONERIL



You strike my people, and your disordered rabble

Make servants of their betters.



Enter the Duke of Albany





LEAR



Woe that too late repents!



Is it your will? Speak, sir.—Prepare my horses.



⌈Exit one or more⌉



Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,

More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child

Than the sea-monster—



ALBANY Pray sir, be patient.



LEAR (to Goneril) Detested kite, thou liest.



My train are men of choice and rarest parts,

That all particulars of duty know,

And in the most exact regard support

The worships of their name. O most small fault,

How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show,

Which, like an engine, wrenched my frame of nature

From the fixed place, drew from my heart all love,

And added to the gall! O Lear, Lear, Lear!

Beat at this gate that let thy folly in

And thy dear judgement out.—Go, go, my people!



ALBANY



My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant

Of what hath moved you.



LEAR It may be so, my lord.



Hear, nature; hear, dear goddess, hear:

Suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend

To make this creature fruitful.

Into her womb convey sterility.

Dry up in her the organs of increase,

And from her derogate body never spring

A babe to honour her. If she must teem,

Create her child of spleen, that it may live

And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.

Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,

With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,

Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits

To laughter and contempt, that she may feel—

That she may feel

How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is

To have a thankless child. Away, away!



Exeunt Lear, ⌈Kent, and attendants⌉



ALBANY



Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?



GONERIL



Never afflict yourself to know more of it,

But let his disposition have that scope

As dotage gives it.



Enter King Lear





LEAR



What, fifty of my followers at a clap?

Within a fortnight?



ALBANY



What’s the matter, sir?



LEAR



I’ll tell thee. (To Goneril) Life and death! I am ashamed

That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,

That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,

Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon

thee!

Th’untented woundings of a father’s curse

Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,

Beweep this cause again I’ll pluck ye out

And cast you, with the waters that you loose,

To temper clay. Ha! Let it be so.

I have another daughter

Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable.

When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails

She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find

That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think

I have cast off for ever.



Exit



GONERIL



Do you mark that?



ALBANY



I cannot be so partial, Goneril,

To the great love I bear you—



GONERIL



Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho!—

You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.



FOOL



Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear,

Tarry, take the fool with thee.

A fox when one has caught her,

And such a daughter,

Should sure to the slaughter,

If my cap would buy a halter.

So, the fool follows after. Exit



GONERIL



This man hath had good counsel—a hundred

knights?

’Tis politic and safe to let him keep

At point a hundred knights, yes, that on every dream,

Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,

He may enguard his dotage with their powers

And hold our lives in mercy.—Oswald, I say!



ALBANY



Well, you may fear too far.



GONERIL



Safer than trust too far.



Let me still take away the harms I fear,

Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.

What he hath uttered I have writ my sister.

If she sustain him and his hundred knights

When I have showed th’unfitness—



Enter Oswald the steward





How now, Oswald?



What, have you writ that letter to my sister?



OSWALD Ay, madam.



GONERIL



Take you some company, and away to horse.

Inform her full of my particular fear,

And thereto add such reasons of your own

As may compact it more. Get you gone,

And hasten your return.



Exit Oswald



No, no, my lord,



This milky gentleness and course of yours,

Though I condemn not, yet under pardon

You are much more attasked for want of wisdom

Than praised for harmful mildness.



ALBANY



How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.

Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.



GONERIL Nay, then—



ALBANY Well, well, th’event.



Exeunt





1.5 Enter King Lear, the Earl of Kent disguised, the First Gentleman, and Lear’s Fool



LEAR ⌈to the Gentleman, giving him a letter⌉ Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. ⌈Exit Gentleman⌉ ⌈To Kent, giving him a letter⌉ Acquaint my daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.

KENT I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter. Exit

FOOL If a man’s brains were in’s heels, were’t not in danger of kibes?

LEAR Ay, boy.

FOOL Then, I prithee, be merry: thy wit shall not go slipshod.

LEAR Ha, ha, ha!

FOOL Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though she’s as like this as a crab’s like an apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.

LEAR What canst tell, boy?

FOOL She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou canst tell why one’s nose stands i’th’ middle on ’s face?

LEAR No.

FOOL Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side ’s nose, that what a man cannot smell out, a may spy into.

LEAR I did her wrong.

FOOL Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?

LEAR No.

FOOL Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.

LEAR Why?

FOOL Why, to put ’s head in, not to give it away to his daughters and leave his horns without a case.

LEAR

I will forget my nature. So kind a father!

Be my horses ready?

FOOL Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.

LEAR Because they are not eight.

FOOL Yes, indeed, thou wouldst make a good fool.

LEAR

To take’t again perforce—monster ingratitude!

FOOL If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’d have thee beaten for being old before thy time.

LEAR How’s that?

FOOL Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.

LEAR

O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!

Keep me in temper. I would not be mad.

⌈Enter the First Gentleman⌉





How now, are the horses ready?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN Ready, my lord.

LEAR (to Fool) Come, boy.

⌈Exeunt Lear and Gentleman⌉

FOOL

She that’s a maid now, and laughs at my departure,

Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

⌈Exit⌉





2.1 Enter Edmond the bastard, and Curan, severally EDMOND Save thee, Curan.



CURAN And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his duchess will be here with him this night.

EDMOND How comes that? CURAN Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad?—I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments.

EDMOND Not I. Pray you, what are they?

CURAN Have you heard of no likely wars toward twixt the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?

EDMOND Not a word.

CURAN You may do then in time. Fare you well, sir.

Exit

EDMOND

The Duke be here tonight! The better, best.

This weaves itself perforce into my business.

⌈Enter Edgar at a window above⌉





My father hath set guard to take my brother,

And I have one thing of a queasy question

Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!—

Brother, a word, descend. Brother, I say.

⌈Edgar climbs down⌉





My father watches. O sir, fly this place.

Intelligence is given where you are hid.

You have now the good advantage of the night.

Have you not spoken ‘gainst the Duke of Cornwall?

He’s coming hither, now, i’th’ night, i‘th’ haste,

And Regan with him. Have you nothing said

Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?

Advise yourself.

EDGAR

I am sure on’t, not a word.

EDMOND

I hear my father coming. Pardon me.

In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.

Draw. Seem to defend yourself. Now, quit you well.

(Calling) Yield, come before my father. Light ho, here!

(To Edgar) Fly, brother! (Calling) Torches, torches!

(To Edgar) So, farewell.

Exit Edgar

Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion

Of my more fierce endeavour.

He wounds his arm





I have seen drunkards

Do more than this in sport. (Calling) Father, father!

Stop, stop! Ho, help!

Enter the Duke of Gloucester, and servants with torches





GLOUCESTER

Now, Edmond, where’s the villain?

EDMOND

Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,

Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon

To stand ’s auspicious mistress.

GLOUCESTER

But where is he?

EDMOND

Look, sir, I bleed.

GLOUCESTER

Where is the villain, Edmond?

EDMOND

Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could—

GLOUCESTER

Pursue him, ho! Go after.

Exeunt servants

By no means what?

EDMOND

Persuade me to the murder of your lordship,

But that I told him the revenging gods

‘Gainst parricides did all the thunder bend,

Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond

The child was bound to th’ father. Sir, in fine,

Seeing how loathly opposite I stood

To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion

With his prepared sword he charges home

My unprovided body, latched mine arm;

And when he saw my best alarumed spirits

Bold in the quarrel’s right, roused to th’encounter,

Or whether ghasted by the noise I made,

Full suddenly he fled.

GLOUCESTER

Let him fly far,

Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,

And found, dispatch. The noble Duke my master,

My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.

By his authority I will proclaim it

That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,

Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;

He that conceals him, death.

EDMOND

When I dissuaded him from his intent

And found him pitched to do it, with curst speech

I threatened to discover him. He replied,

‘Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think

If I would stand against thee, would the reposal

Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee

Make thy words faithed? No, what I should deny—

As this I would, ay, though thou didst produce

My very character—I’d turn it all

To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice,

And thou must make a dullard of the world

If they not thought the profits of my death

Were very pregnant and potential spirits

To make thee seek it.’

GLOUCESTER

O strange and fastened villain!

Would he deny his letter, said he?

Tucket within

Hark, the Duke’s trumpets. I know not why he comes.

All ports I’ll bar. The villain shall not scape.

The Duke must grant me that; besides, his picture

I will send far and near, that all the kingdom

May have due note of him—and of my land,

Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means

To make thee capable.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall, Regan, and attendants





CORNWALL

How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,

Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

REGAN

If it be true, all vengeance comes too short

Which can pursue th’offender. How dost, my lord?

GLOUCESTER

O madam, my old heart is cracked, it’s cracked.

REGAN

What, did my father’s godson seek your life?

He whom my father named, your Edgar?

GLOUCESTER

O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!

REGAN

Was he not companion with the riotous knights

That tend upon my father?

GLOUCESTER

I know not, madam. ’Tis too bad, too bad.

EDMOND

Yes, madam, he was of that consort.

REGAN

No marvel, then, though he were ill affected.

‘Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,

To have th’expense and spoil of his revenues.

I have this present evening from my sister

Been well informed of them, and with such cautions

That if they come to sojourn at my house

I’ll not be there.

CORNWALL

Nor I, assure thee, Regan. Edmond, I hear that you have shown your father A childlike office.

EDMOND

It was my duty, sir. GLOUCESTER (to Cornwall)

He did bewray his practice, and received

This hurt you see striving to apprehend him.

CORNWALL

Is he pursued?

GLOUCESTER Ay, my good lord.

CORNWALL

If he be taken, he shall never more

Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose

How in my strength you please. For you, Edmond,

Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant

So much commend itself, you shall be ours.

Natures of such deep trust we shall much need.

You we first seize on.

EDMOND

I shall serve you, sir,

Truly, however else.

GLOUCESTER (to Cornwall) For him I thank your grace.

CORNWALL

You know not why we came to visit you—

REGAN

Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night—

Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,

Wherein we must have use of your advice.

Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,

Of differences which I least thought it fit

To answer from our home. The several messengers

From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,

Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow

Your needful counsel to our businesses,

Which craves the instant use.

GLOUCESTER I serve you, madam.

Your graces are right welcome.

Flourish. Exeunt





2.2 Enter the Earl of Kent, disguised, and Oswald the steward, severally



OSWALD Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house? KENT Ay.

OSWALD Where may we set our horses?

KENT I’th’ mire.

OSWALD Prithee, if thou lov’st me, tell me. 5 KENT I love thee not.

OSWALD Why then, I care not for thee.

KENT If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold I would make thee care for me.

OSWALD Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.

KENT Fellow, I know thee.

OSWALD What dost thou know me for?

KENT A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking, whoreson, glass-gazing, super-serviceable, finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch, one whom I will beat into clamorous whining if thou deniest the least syllable of thy addition.

OSWALD Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!

KENT What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me! Is it two days since I tripped up thy heels and beat thee before the King? Draw, you rogue; for though it be night, yet the moon shines.

⌈He draws his sword⌉





I’ll make a sop o’th’ moonshine of you, you whoreson, cullionly barber-monger, draw!

OSWALD Away. I have nothing to do with thee.

KENT Draw, you rascal. You come with letters against the King, and take Vanity the puppet’s part against the royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I’ll so carbonado your shanks—draw, you rascal, come your ways!

OSWALD Help, ho, murder, help!

KENT Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave, strike! 40

OSWALD Help, ho, murder, murder!

Enter Edmond the bastard, ⌈then⌉ the Duke of

Cornwall, Regan, the Duke of Gloucester, and

servants





EDMOND How now, what’s the matter? Part.

KENT With you, goodman boy. If you please, come, I’ll flesh ye. Come on, young master.

GLOUCESTER Weapons? Arms? What’s the matter here?

CORNWALL

Keep peace, upon your lives. He dies that strikes again.

What is the matter?

REGAN The messengers from our sister and the King. CORNWALL (to Kent and Oswald) What is your difference?

Speak.

OSWALD I am scarce in breath, my lord.

KENT No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour, you cowardly rascal. Nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.

CORNWALL Thou art a strange fellow—a tailor make a man?

KENT A tailor, sir. A stone-cutter or a painter could not have made him so ill though they had been but two years o’th’ trade.

CORNWALL Speak yet; how grew your quarrel?

OSWALD This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his grey beard—

KENT Thou whoreson Z, thou unnecessary letter—(to Cornwall) my lord, if you’ll give me leave I will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall of a jakes with him. (To Oswald) Spare my grey beard, you wagtail?

CORNWALL Peace, sirrah.

You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

KENT

Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.

CORNWALL Why art thou angry?

KENT

That such a slave as this should wear a sword,

Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,

Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain

Which are too intrince t’unloose, smooth every

passion

That in the natures of their lords rebel;

Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods,

Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks

With every gall and vary of their masters,

Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.

⌈To Oswald⌉ A plague upon your epileptic visage!

Smile you my speeches as I were a fool?

Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain

I’d drive ye cackling home to Camelot.

CORNWALL

What, art thou mad, old fellow?

GLOUCESTER ⌈to Kent⌉ How fell you out? Say that.

KENT

No contraries hold more antipathy Than I and such a knave.

CORNWALL

Why dost thou call him knave?

What is his fault?

KENT His countenance likes me not.

CORNWALL

No more perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers.

KENT

Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:

I have seen better faces in my time

Than stands on any shoulder that I see

Before me at this instant.

CORNWALL This is some fellow

Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect

A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb

Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he;

An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth.

An they will take’t, so; if not, he’s plain.

These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness

Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends

Than twenty silly-ducking observants

That stretch their duties nicely.

KENT

Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,

Under th‘allowance of your great aspect,

Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire

On flick’ring Phoebus’ front—

CORNWALL

What mean’st by this?

KENT To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to’t.

CORNWALL (to Oswald)

What was th’offence you gave him?

OSWALD

I never gave him any.

It pleased the King his master very late

To strike at me upon his misconstruction,

When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure,

Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed,

And put upon him such a deal of man

That worthied him, got praises of the King

For him attempting who was self-subdued,

And in the fleshment of this dread exploit

Drew on me here again.

KENT

None of these rogues and cowards

But Ajax is their fool.

CORNWALL

Fetch forth the stocks!

⌈Exeunt some servants⌉

You stubborn, ancient knave, you reverend braggart,

We’ll teach you.

KENT

Sir, I am too old to learn.

Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King,

On whose employment I was sent to you.

You shall do small respect, show too bold malice

Against the grace and person of my master,

Stocking his messenger.

CORNWALL ⌈calling⌉

Fetch forth the stocks!—

As I have life and honour, there shall he sit till noon.

REGAN

Till noon?—till night, my lord, and all night too.

KENT

Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog

You should not use me so.

REGAN

Sir, being his knave, I will.

Stocks brought out





CORNWALL

This is a fellow of the selfsame colour

Our sister speaks of.—Come, bring away the stocks.

GLOUCESTER

Let me beseech your grace not to do so.

The King his master needs must take it ill

That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,

Should have him thus restrained.

CORNWALL I’ll answer that.

⌈Theg put Kent in the stocks⌉





REGAN

My sister may receive it much more worse

To have her gentlemen abused, assaulted.

CORNWALL Come, my good lord, away!

Exeunt all but Gloucester and Kent





GLOUCESTER

I am sorry for thee, friend. ’Tis the Duke’s pleasure,

Whose disposition, all the world well knows,

Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I’ll entreat for thee.

KENT

Pray do not, sir. I have watched and travelled hard.

Some time I shall sleep out; the rest I’ll whistle.

A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels.

Give you good morrow.

GLOUCESTER

The Duke’s to blame in this; ’twill be ill taken. Exit

KENT

Good King, that must approve the common say:

Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st

To the warm sun.

⌈He takes out a letter⌉





Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,

That by thy comfortable beams I may

Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles

But misery. I know ‘tis from Cordelia,

Who hath now fortunately been informed

Of my obscured course, and shall find time

For this enormous state, seeking to give

Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatched,

Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold

This shameful lodging. Fortune, good night;

Smile once more; turn thy wheel.

He sleeps

Enter Edgar





EDGAR

I heard myself proclaimed,

And by the happy hollow of a tree

Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place

That guard and most unusual vigilance

Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape

I will preserve myself, and am bethought

To take the basest and most poorest shape

That ever penury in contempt of man

Brought near to beast. My face I’ll grime with filth,

Blanket my loins, elf all my hairs in knots,

And with presented nakedness outface

The winds and persecutions of the sky.

The country gives me proof and precedent

Of Bedlam beggars who with roaring voices

Strike in their numbed and mortified arms

Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,

And with this horrible object from low farms,

Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes and mills

Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers

Enforce their charity. ‘Poor Tuelygod, Poor Tom.’

That’s something yet. Edgar I nothing am.

Exit

Enter King Lear, his Fool, and ⌈the First⌉ Gentleman





LEAR

’Tis strange that they should so depart from home

And not send back my messenger.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

As I learned,

The night before there was no purpose in them

Of this remove.

KENT (waking)

Hail to thee, noble master.

LEAR

Ha! Mak’st thou this shame thy pastime?

KENT No, my lord.

FOOL Ha, ha, he wears cruel garters! Horses are tied by the heads, dogs and bears by th’ neck, monkeys by th’ loins, and men by th’ legs. When a man’s overlusty at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.

LEAR (to Kent)

What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook To set thee here?

KENT It is both he and she:

Your son and daughter.





LEAR By Jupiter, I swear no.

KENT

By Juno, I swear ay.

LEAR They durst not do’t,

They could not, would not do’t. ’Tis worse than

murder,

To do upon respect such violent outrage.

Resolve me with all modest haste which way

Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,

Coming from us.

KENT My lord, when at their home

I did commend your highness’ letters to them,

Ere I was risen from the place that showed

My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post

Stewed in his haste, half breathless, painting forth

From Goneril, his mistress, salutations,

Delivered letters spite of intermission,

Which presently they read, on whose contents 210

They summoned up their meiny, straight took horse,

Commanded me to follow and attend

The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks;

And meeting here the other messenger,

Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine—

Being the very fellow which of late

Displayed so saucily against your highness—

Having more man than wit about me, drew.

He raised the house with loud and coward cries.

Your son and daughter found this trespass worth

The shame which here it suffers.

FOOL Winter’s not gone yet if the wild geese fly that way.

⌈Sings⌉ Fathers that wear rags

Do make their children blind,

But fathers that bear bags

Shall see their children kind.

Fortune, that arrant whore,

Ne’er turns the key to th’ poor.





But for all this thou shalt have as many dolours for

thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.

LEAR

O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!

Histerica passio down, thou climbing sorrow;

Thy element’s below.—Where is this daughter?

KENT

With the Earl, sir, here within.

LEAR

Follow me not; stay here.

Exit

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN (to Kent)

Made you no more offence but what you speak of?

KENT None.

How chance the King comes with so small a number?

FOOL An thou hadst been set i’th’ stocks for that question, thou’dst well deserved it.

KENT Why, Fool?

FOOL We’ll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there’s no labouring i’th’ winter. All that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there’s not a nose among twenty but can smell him that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after. When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.

⌈Sings⌉

That sir which serves and seeks for gain

And follows but for form,

Will pack when it begin to rain,

And leave thee in the storm.



But I will tarry, the fool will stay,

And let the wise man fly.

The knave turns fool that runs away,

The fool no knave, pardie.





KENT Where learned you this, Fool?

FOOL Not i’th’ stocks, fool.

Enter King Lear and the Duke of Gloucester





LEAR

Deny to speak with me? They are sick, they are weary,

They have travelled all the night?—mere fetches,

The images of revolt and flying off.

Fetch me a better answer.

GLOUCESTER

My dear lord,

You know the fiery quality of the Duke,

How unremovable and fixed he is

In his own course.

LEAR

Vengeance, plague, death, confusion!

‘Fiery’? What ‘quality’? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,

I’d speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

GLOUCESTER

Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.

LEAR

‘Informed them’? Dost thou understand me, man?

GLOUCESTER Ay, my good lord.

LEAR

The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father

Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends

service.

Are they ‘informed’ of this? My breath and blood—

‘Fiery’? The ‘fiery’ Duke—tell the hot Duke that—

No, but not yet. Maybe he is not well.

Infirmity doth still neglect all office

Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves

When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind

To suffer with the body. I’ll forbear,

And am fallen out with my more headier will,

To take the indisposed and sickly fit

For the sound man.—Death on my state, wherefore

Should he sit here? This act persuades me

That this remotion of the Duke and her

Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.

Go tell the Duke and’s wife I’d speak with them,

Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,

Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum

Till it cry sleep to death.

GLOUCESTER

I would have all well betwixt you.

Exit

LEAR

O me, my heart! My rising heart! But down.

FOOL Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put ‘em i’th’ paste alive. She knapped ‘em o’th’ coxcombs with a stick, and cried ‘Down, wantons, down!’ ’Twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall, Regan, the Duke of Gloucester, and servants





LEAR Good morrow to you both.

CORNWALL Hail to your grace.

Kent here set at liberty





REGAN I am glad to see your highness.

LEAR

Regan, I think you are. I know what reason

I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad

I would divorce me from thy mother’s shrine,

Sepulchring an adultress. (To Kent) O, are you free?

Some other time for that. ⌈Exit Kent⌉

Beloved Regan,

Thy sister’s naught. O, Regan, she hath tied

Sharp-toothed unkindness like a vulture here.

I can scarce speak to thee. Thou’lt not believe

With how depraved a quality-O, Regan!

REGAN

I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope

You less know how to value her desert

Than she to scant her duty.

LEAR

Say, how is that?

REGAN

I cannot think my sister in the least

Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance

She have restrained the riots of your followers,

’Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end

As clears her from all blame.

LEAR My curses on her.

REGAN O sir, you are old.

Nature in you stands on the very verge

Of his confine. You should be ruled and led

By some discretion that discerns your state

Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you

That to our sister you do make return;

Say you have wronged her.

LEAR

Ask her forgiveness?

Do you but mark how this becomes the house?

⌈Kneehng⌉ ‘Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.

Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg

That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.’

REGAN

Good sir, no more. These are unsightly tricks.

Return you to my sister.

LEAR ⌈rising⌉

Never, Regan.

She hath abated me of half my train,

Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue

Most serpent-like upon the very heart.

All the stored vengeances of heaven fall

On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,

You taking airs, with lameness!

CORNWALL

Fie, sir, fie.

LEAR

You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames

Into her scornful eyes. Infect her beauty,

You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the pow’rful sun

To fall and blister.

REGAN

O, the blest gods!

So will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.

LEAR

No, Regan. Thou shalt never have my curse.

Thy tender-hafted nature shall not give

Thee o‘er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but thine

Do comfort and not burn. ’Tis not in thee

To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,

To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,

And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt

Against my coming in. Thou better know‘st

The offices of nature, bond of childhood,

Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.

Thy half o’th’ kingdom hast thou not forgot,

Wherein I thee endowed.

REGAN

Good sir, to th’ purpose.

LEAR

Who put my man i’th’ stocks?

Tucket within





CORNWALL

What trumpet’s that?

Enter Oswald the steward





REGAN

I know’t, my sister’s. This approves her letter

That she would soon be here. (To Oswald) Is your lady

come?

LEAR

This is a slave whose easy-borrowed pride

Dwells in the sickly grace of her a follows.

(To Oswald) Out, varlet, from my sight!

CORNWALL What means your grace?

Enter Goneril





LEAR

Who stocked my servant? Regan, I have good hope

Thou didst not know on’t. Who comes here? O heavens,

If you do love old men, if your sweet sway

Allow obedience, if you yourselves are old,

Make it your cause! Send down and take my part.

(To Goneril) Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?

O Regan, will you take her by the hand?

GONERIL

Why not by th’ hand, sir? How have I offended?

All’s not offence that indiscretion finds

And dotage terms so.

LEAR

O sides, you are too tough!

Will you yet hold?—How came my man i’th’ stocks?

CORNWALL

I set him there, sir; but his own disorders

Deserved much less advancement.

LEAR

You? Did you?

REGAN

I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.

If till the expiration of your month

You will return and sojourn with my sister,

Dismissing half your train, come then to me.

I am now from home, and out of that provision

Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

LEAR

Return to her, and fifty men dismissed?

No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose

To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,

To wage against the enmity o’th’ air

Necessity’s sharp pinch. Return with her?

Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took

Our youngest born—I could as well be brought

To knee his throne and, squire-like, pension beg

To keep base life afoot. Return with her?

Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter

To this detested groom.

GONERIL

At your choice, sir.

LEAR

I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.

I will not trouble thee, my child. Farewell.

We’ll no more meet, no more see one another.

But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter—

Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh,

Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,

A plague-sore or embossed carbuncle

In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee.

Let shame come when it will, I do not call it.

I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,

Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.

Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure.

I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,

I and my hundred knights.

REGAN

Not altogether so.

I looked not for you yet, nor am provided

For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;

For those that mingle reason with your passion

Must be content to think you old, and so—

But she knows what she does.

LEAR

Is this well spoken?

REGAN

I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?

Is it not well? What should you need of more,

Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger

Speak ‘gainst so great a number? How in one house

Should many people under two commands

Hold amity? ’Tis hard, almost impossible.

GONERIL

Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance

From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

REGAN

Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack ye,

We could control them. If you will come to me—

For now I spy a danger—I entreat you

To bring but five-and-twenty; to no more

Will I give place or notice.

LEAR I gave you all.

REGAN And in good time you gave it.

LEAR

Made you my guardians, my depositaries,

But kept a reservation to be followed

With such a number. What, must I come to you

With five-and-twenty? Regan, said you so?

REGAN

And speak’t again, my lord. No more with me.

LEAR

Those wicked creatures yet do look well favoured

When others are more wicked. Not being the worst

Stands in some rank of praise. (To Goneril) I’ll go with

thee.

Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,

And thou art twice her love.

GONERIL

Hear me, my lord.

What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,

To follow in a house where twice so many

Have a command to tend you?

REGAN

What need one?

LEAR

O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars

Are in the poorest thing superfluous.

Allow not nature more than nature needs,

Man’s life is cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady.

If only to go warm were gorgeous,

Why, nature needs not what thou, gorgeous, wear’st,

Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But for true need—

You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need.

You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,

As full of grief as age, wretched in both.

If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts

Against their father, fool me not so much

To bear it tamely. Touch me with noble anger,

And let not women’s weapons, water-drops,

Stain my man’s cheeks. No, you unnatural hags,

I will have such revenges on you both

That all the world shall—I will do such things—

What they are, yet I know not; but they shall be

The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep.

No, I’ll not weep. I have full cause of weeping,

Storm and tempest





But this heart shall break into a hundred thousand

flaws

Or ere I’ll weep.—O Fool, I shall go mad!

Exeunt Lear, Fool, Gentleman, and Gloucester





CORNWALL

Let us withdraw. ’Twill be a storm.

REGAN

This house is little. The old man and ’s people

Cannot be well bestowed.

GONERIL

’Tis his own blame;

Hath put himself from rest, and must needs taste his folly.

REGAN

For his particular I’ll receive him gladly,

But not one follower.

GONERIL

So am I purposed.

Where is my lord of Gloucester?

CORNWALL

Followed the old man forth.

⌈Enter the Duke of Gloucester⌉





He is returned.

GLOUCESTER

The King is in high rage.

CORNWALL

Whither is he going?

GLOUCESTER

He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.

CORNWALL

’Tis best to give him way. He leads himself.

GONERIL (to Gloucester)

My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

GLOUCESTER

Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds

Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about

There’s scarce a bush.

REGAN

O sir, to wilful men

The injuries that they themselves procure

Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.

He is attended with a desperate train,

And what they may incense him to, being apt

To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.

CORNWALL

Shut up your doors, my lord. ‘Tis a wild night.

My Regan counsels well. Come out o’th’ storm. Exeunt





3.1 Storm still. Enter the Earl of Kent disguised and ⌈the First⌉ Gentleman, severally



KENT

Who’s there, besides foul weather?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

One minded like the weather,

Most unquietly.

KENT

I know you. Where’s the King?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Contending with the fretful elements;

Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea

Or swell the curled waters ’bove the main,

That things might change or cease.

KENT

But who is with him?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

None but the Fool, who labours to outjest

His heart-struck injuries.

KENT

Sir, I do know you,

And dare upon the warrant of my note

Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,

Although as yet the face of it is covered

With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall,

Who have—as who have not that their great stars

Throned and set high—servants, who seem no less,

Which are to France the spies and speculations

Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,

Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,

Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne

Against the old kind King; or something deeper,

Whereof perchance these are but furnishings—

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

I will talk further with you.

KENT

No, do not.

For confirmation that I am much more

Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take

What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia—

As fear not but you shall—show her this ring

And she will tell you who that fellow is

That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!

I will go seek the King.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?

KENT

Few words, but to effect more than all yet:

That when we have found the King—in which your

pain

That way, I’ll this—he that first lights on him

Holla the other.

Exeunt severally





3.2 Storm still. Enter King Lear and his Fool



LEAR

Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow,

You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout

Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the

cocks!

You sulph‘rous and thought-executing fires,

Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts,

Singe my white head; and thou all-shaking thunder,

Strike flat the thick rotundity o’th’ world,

Crack nature’s moulds, all germens spill at once

That makes ingrateful man.

FOOL O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rain-water out o’ door. Good nuncle, in, ask thy daughters blessing. Here’s a night pities neither wise men nor fools.

LEAR

Rumble thy bellyful; spit, fire; spout, rain.

Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.

I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.

I never gave you kingdom, called you children.

You owe me no subscription. Then let fall

Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,

A poor, infirm, weak and despised old man,

But yet I call you servile ministers,

That will with two pernicious daughters join

Your high-engendered battles ‘gainst a head

So old and white as this. O, ho, ’tis foul!

FOOL He that has a house to put ’s head in has a good head-piece.

⌈Sings⌉

The codpiece that will house

Before the head has any,

The head and he shall louse,

So beggars marry many.

The man that makes his toe

What he his heart should make

Shall of a corn cry woe,

And turn his sleep to wake—



for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.

Enter the Earl of Kent disguised





LEAR

No, I will be the pattern of all patience.

I will say nothing.

KENT Who’s there?

FOOL Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece—that’s a wise man and a fool.

KENT (to Lear)

Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night

Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies

Gallow the very wanderers of the dark

And make them keep their caves. Since I was man

Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,

Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never

Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry

Th’affliction nor the fear.

LEAR

Let the great gods,

That keep this dreadful pother o’er our heads,

Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch

That hast within thee undivulgèd crimes

Unwhipped of justice; hide thee, thou bloody hand,

Thou perjured and thou simular of virtue

That art incestuous; caitiff, to pieces shake,

That under covert and convenient seeming

Has practised on man’s life; close pent-up guilts,

Rive your concealing continents and cry

These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man

More sinned against than sinning.

KENT

Alack, bare-headed?

Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.

Some friendship will it lend you ‘gainst the tempest.

Repose you there while I to this hard house—

More harder than the stones whereof ’tis raised,

Which even but now, demanding after you,

Denied me to come in—return and force

Their scanted courtesy.

LEAR

My wits begin to turn.

(To Fool) Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art

cold?

I am cold myself.—Where is this straw, my fellow?

The art of our necessities is strange,

And can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.—

Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart

That’s sorry yet for thee.

FOOL ⌈Sings⌉

He that has and a little tiny wit,

With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain,

Must make content with his fortunes fit,

Though the rain it raineth every day.





LEAR

True, boy. (To Kent) Come, bring us to this hovel.

Exeunt Lear and Kent

FOOL This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I’ll speak a prophecy ere I go:

When priests are more in word than matter;

When brewers mar their malt with water;

When nobles are their tailors’ tutors,

No heretics burned, but wenches’ suitors,

Then shall the realm of Albion

Come to great confusion.





When every case in law is right;

No squire in debt nor no poor knight;

When slanders do not live in tongues,

Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;

When usurers tell their gold i‘th’ field,

And bawds and whores do churches build,

Then comes the time, who lives to see’t,

That going shall be used with feet.



This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.

Exit





3.3 Enter the Duke of Gloucester and Edmond



GLOUCESTER Alack, alack, Edmond, I like not this unnatural dealing. When I desired their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain of perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, or any way sustain him.

EDMOND Most savage and unnatural!

GLOUCESTER Go to, say you nothing. There is division between the Dukes, and a worse matter than that. I have received a letter this night—‘tis dangerous to be spoken—I have locked the letter in my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged home. There is part of a power already footed. We must incline to the King. I will look him and privily relieve him. Go you and maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. If I die for’t—as no less is threatened me—the King my old master must be relieved. There is strange things toward, Edmond; pray you be careful. Exit

EDMOND

This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke

Instantly know, and of that letter too.

This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me

That which my father loses: no less than all.

The younger rises when the old doth fall. Exit





3.4 Enter King Lear, the Earl of Kent disguised, and Lear’s Fool



KENT

Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.

The tyranny of the open night’s too rough

For nature to endure.

Storm still





LEAR Let me alone.

KENT

Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR

Wilt break my heart?

KENT

I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.

LEAR

Thou think‘st ’tis much that this contentious storm

Invades us to the skin. So ‘tis to thee;

But where the greater malady is fixed,

The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear,

But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea

Thou‘dst meet the bear i’th’ mouth. When the mind’s

free,

The body’s delicate. This tempest in my mind

Doth from my senses take all feeling else

Save what beats there: filial ingratitude.

Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand

For lifting food to’t? But I will punish home.

No, I will weep no more.—In such a night

To shut me out? Pour on, I will endure.

In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril,

Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all—

O, that way madness lies. Let me shun that.

No more of that.

KENT

Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR

Prithee, go in thyself. Seek thine own ease.

This tempest will not give me leave to ponder

On things would hurt me more; but I’ll go in.

(To Fool) In, boy; go first. ⌈Kneeling⌉ You houseless

poverty—

Nay, get thee in. I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep.

Exit Fool

Poor naked wretches, wheresoe‘er you are,

That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,

How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,

Your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you

From seasons such as these? O, I have ta’en

Too little care of this. Take physic, pomp,

Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,

That thou mayst shake the superflux to them

And show the heavens more just.

Enter Lear’s Fool, ⌈and Edgar as a Bedlam beggar in the hovel⌉





EDGAR

Fathom and half! Fathom and half! Poor Tom!

FOOL Come not in here, nuncle. Here’s a spirit. Help me, help me!

KENT Give me thy hand. Who’s there? FOOL A spirit, a spirit. He says his name’s Poor Tom.

KENT

What art thou that dost grumble there i’th’ straw?

Come forth.

⌈Edgar comes forth⌉





EDGAR

Away, the foul fiend follows me.

Thorough the sharp hawthorn blow the winds. Hm!

Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.

LEAR

Didst thou give all to thy two daughters,

And art thou come to this?

EDGAR Who gives anything to Poor Tom, whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o’er bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five wits, Tom’s a-cold! O, do, de, do, de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking. Do Poor Tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now, and there, and there again, and there.

Storm still





LEAR

Has his daughters brought him to this pass?

(To Edgar) Couldst thou save nothing? Wouldst thou

give ’em all?

FOOL Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

LEAR (to Edgar)

Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air

Hang fated o’er men’s faults light on thy daughters!

KENT He hath no daughters, sir.

LEAR

Death, traitor! Nothing could have subdued nature

To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.

(To Edgar) Is it the fashion that discarded fathers

Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?

Judicious punishment: ’twas this flesh begot

Those pelican daughters.

EDGAR Pillicock sat on Pillicock Hill; alow, alow, loo, loo.

FOOL This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

EDGAR Take heed o’th’ foul fiend; obey thy parents; keep thy words’ justice; swear not; commit not with man’s sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud array. Tom’s a-cold.

LEAR What hast thou been?

EDGAR A servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress’ heart, and did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it. Wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in woman out-paramoured the Turk. False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders’ books, and defy the foul fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, says suum, mun, nonny. Dauphin, my boy! Boy, cessez; let him trot by.

Storm still





LEAR Thou wert better in a grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies. Is man no. more than this? Consider him well. Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha, here’s three on ’s are sophisticated; thou art the thing itself. Unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings! Come, unbutton here.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester with a torch





FOOL Prithee, nuncle, be contented. ’Tis a naughty night to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher’s heart—a small spark, all the rest on ’s body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.

EDGAR This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature of earth. ⌈Sings⌉

Swithin footed thrice the wold,

A met the night mare and her nine foal,

Bid her alight

And her troth plight,

And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!





KENT (to Lear)

How fares your grace?

LEAR What’s he?

KENT (to Gloucester) Who’s there? What is’t you seek?

GLOUCESTER What are you there? Your names?

EDGAR Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cowdung for salads, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to tithing, and stocked, punished, and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body,

Horse to ride, and weapon to wear;

But mice and rats and such small deer

Have been Tom’s food for seven long year.





Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

What, hath your grace no better company?

EDGAR

The Prince of Darkness is a gentleman.

Modo he’s called, and Mahu.

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile

That it doth hate what gets it.

EDGAR Poor Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer

T’obey in all your daughters’ hard commands.

Though their injunction be to bar my doors

And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,

Yet have I ventured to come seek you out

And bring you where both fire and food is ready.

LEAR

First let me talk with this philosopher.

(To Edgar) What is the cause of thunder?

KENT

Good my lord, take his offer; go into th’ house.

LEAR

I’ll talk a word with this same learned Theban.

(To Edgar) What is your study?

EDGAR

How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.

LEAR

Let me ask you one word in private.

They converse apart





KENT (to Gloucester)

Importune him once more to go, my lord.

His wits begin t’unsettle.

GLOUCESTER

Canst thou blame him?

Storm still





His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent,

He said it would be thus, poor banished man!

Thou sayst the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee, friend,

I am almost mad myself. I had a son,

Now outlawed from my blood; a sought my life

But lately, very late. I loved him, friend;

No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,

The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this!

(To Lear) I do beseech your grace—

LEAR

O, cry you mercy, sir!

(To Edgar) Noble philosopher, your company.

EDGAR

Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER

In, fellow, there in t’hovel; keep thee warm.

LEAR

Come, let’s in all.

KENT

This way, my lord.

LEAR With him!

I will keep still with my philosopher.

KENT (to Gloucester)

Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.

GLOUCESTER Take him you on.

KENT ⌈to Edgar⌉

Sirrah, come on. Go along with us.

LEAR (to Edgar)

Come, good Athenian.

GLOUCESTER

No words, no words. Hush.

EDGAR

Child Roland to the dark tower came,

His word was still ‘Fie, fo, and fum;

I smell the blood of a British man.’

Exeunt





3.5 Enter the Duke of Cornwall and Edmond



CORNWALL I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.

EDMOND How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of.

CORNWALL I now perceive it was not altogether your brother’s evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit set a-work by a reprovable badness in himself. 8

EDMOND How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just! This is the letter which he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens, that this treason were not, or not I the detector!

CORNWALL Go with me to the Duchess.

EDMOND If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.

CORNWALL True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.

EDMOND ⌈aside⌉ If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. (To Cornwall) I will persever in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.

CORNWALL I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love. Exeunt





3.6 Enter the Earl of Kent disguised, and the Duke of Gloucester



GLOUCESTER Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be long from you.

KENT All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience; the gods reward your kindness!

Exit Gloucester

Enter King Lear, Edgar as a Bedlam beggar, and Lear’s Fool





EDGAR Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.

FOOL Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman.

LEAR A king, a king!

FOOL No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he’s a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.

LEAR

To have a thousand with red burning spits

Come hissing in upon ’em!

EDGAR Bless thy five wits.

KENT (to Lear)

O, pity! Sir, where is the patience now

That you so oft have boasted to retain?

EDGAR (aside)

My tears begin to take his part so much

They mar my counterfeiting.

LEAR The little dogs and all,

Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart—see, they bark at me.

EDGAR Tom will throw his head at them.—Avaunt, you curs!

Be thy mouth or black or white,

Tooth that poisons if it bite,

Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,

Hound or spaniel, brach or him,

Bobtail tyke or trundle-tail,

Tom will make him weep and wail;

For with throwing thus my head,

Dogs leapt the hatch, and all are fled.





Do, de, de, de. Sese! Come, march to wakes and fairs

And market towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.

LEAR Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard-hearts? (To Edgar) You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred, only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You will say they are Persian; but let them be changed.

KENT

Now, good my lord, lie here and rest a while.

LEAR Make no noise, make no noise. Draw the curtains.

So, so. We’ll go to supper i’th’ morning.

⌈He steps⌉





FOOL And I’ll go to bed at noon.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester





GLOUCESTER (to Kent)

Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?

KENT

Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.

GLOUCESTER

Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.

I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him.

There is a litter ready. Lay him in’t

And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet

Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.

If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,

With thine and all that offer to defend him,

Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,

And follow me, that will to some provision

Give thee quick conduct. Come, come away.

Exeunt, ⌈Kent carrying Lear in his arms⌉





3.7 Enter the Duke of Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, Edmond the bastard, and Servants



CORNWALL (to Goneril)

Post speedily to my lord your husband.

Show him this letter. The army of France is landed.

(To Servants) Seek out the traitor Gloucester.

Exeunt some

REGAN Hang him instantly.

GONERIL

Pluck out his eyes.

CORNWALL

Leave him to my displeasure.

Edmond, keep you our sister company.

The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous

father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke

where you are going, to a most festinate preparation;

we are bound to the like. Our posts shall be swift and

intelligent betwixt us. (To Goneril) Farewell, dear sister.

(To Edmond) Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

Enter Oswald the steward





How now, where’s the King?

OSWALD

My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.

Some five- or six-and-thirty of his knights,

Hot questrists after him, met him at gate,

Who, with some other of the lord’s dependants,

Are gone with him toward Dover, where they boast

To have well-armèd friends.

CORNWALL Get horses for your mistress.

Exit Oswald

GONERIL Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

CORNWALL

Edmond, farewell.

Exeunt Goneril and Edmond

(To Servants) Go seek the traitor Gloucester.

Pinion him like a thief; bring him before us.

Exeunt other Servants

Though well we may not pass upon his life

Without the form of justice, yet our power

Shall do a curtsy to our wrath, which men

May blame but not control.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester and Servants





Who’s there—the traitor?

REGAN

Ingrateful fox, ’tis he.

CORNWALL (to Servants) Bind fast his corky arms.

GLOUCESTER

What means your graces? Good my friends, consider

You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.

CORNWALL (to Servants)

Bind him, I say.

REGAN Hard, hard! O filthy traitor!

GLOUCESTER

Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.

CORNWALL (to Servants)

To this chair bind him. (To Gloucester) Villain, thou shalt find—

Regan plucks Gloucester’s beard





GLOUCESTER

By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done,

To pluck me by the beard.

REGAN So white, and such a traitor?

GLOUCESTER Naughty lady,

These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin

Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host.

With robbers’ hands my hospitable favours

You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

CORNWALL

Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?

REGAN

Be simple-answered, for we know the truth.

CORNWALL

And what confederacy have you with the traitors

Late footed in the kingdom?

REGAN To whose hands

You have sent the lunatic King. Speak.

GLOUCESTER

I have a letter guessingly set down,

Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,

And not from one opposed.

CORNWALL

Cunning.

REGAN

And false.

CORNWALL

Where hast thou sent the King?

GLOUCESTER

To Dover.

REGAN

Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril—

CORNWALL

Wherefore to Dover?—Let him answer that.

GLOUCESTER

I am tied to th’ stake, and I must stand the course.

REGAN Wherefore to Dover?

GLOUCESTER

Because I would not see thy cruel nails

Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister

In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.

The sea, with such a storm as his bare head

In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up

And quenched the stellèd fires.

Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.

If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time,

Thou shouldst have said ‘Good porter, turn the key;

All cruels I’ll subscribe.’ But I shall see

The winged vengeance overtake such children.

CORNWALL

See’t shalt thou never.—Fettows, hold the chair.—

Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.

GLOUCESTER

He that will think to live till he be old

Give me some help!—O cruel! O you gods!

⌈Cornwall pulls out one of Gloucester’s eyes and stamps on it⌉





REGAN (to Cornwall)

One side will mock another; th’other, too.

CORNWALL (to Gloucester)

If you see vengeance—

SERVANT

Hold your hand, my lord.

I have served you ever since I was a child,

But better service have I never done you

Than now to bid you hold.

REGAN

How now, you dog!

SERVANT

If you did wear a beard upon your chin

I’d shake it on this quarrel. ⌈To Cornwall⌉ What do

you mean?

CORNWALL My villein!

SERVANT

Nay then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

They draw and fight





REGAN (to another Servant)

Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!

⌈She takes a sword and runs at him behind⌉





SERVANT (to Gloucester)

O, I am slain. My lord, you have one eye left

To see some mischief on him.

⌈Regan stabs him again⌉





O!

He dies

CORNWALL

Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!

He ⌈pulls out⌉ Gloucester’s other eye





Where is thy lustre now?

GLOUCESTER

All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Edmond?

Edmond, enkindle all the sparks of nature

To quite this horrid act.

REGAN

Out, treacherous villain!

Thou call’st on him that hates thee. It was he

That made the overture of thy treasons to us,

Who is too good to pity thee.

GLOUCESTER

O, my follies! Then Edgar was abused.

Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!

REGAN (to Servants)

Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell

His way to Dover.

Exit one or more with Gloucester

How is’t, my lord? How look you?

CORNWALL

I have received a hurt. Follow me, lady.

(To Servants) Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this

slave

Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace.

Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.

Exeunt ⌈with the body⌉





4.1 Enter Edgar as a Bedlam beggar



EDGAR

Yet better thus and known to be contemned

Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst,

The low’st and most dejected thing of fortune,

Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.

The lamentable change is from the best;

The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,

Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace.

The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst

Owes nothing to thy blasts.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester led by an Old Man





But who comes here?

My father, parti-eyed? World, world, O world!

But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,

Life would not yield to age.

⌈Edgar stands aside⌉





OLD MAN (to Gloucester) O my good lord,

I have been your tenant and your father’s tenant

These fourscore years.

GLOUCESTER

Away, get thee away, good friend, be gone.

Thy comforts can do me no good at all;

Thee they may hurt.

OLD MAN

You cannot see your way.

GLOUCESTER

I have no way, and therefore want no eyes.

I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen

Our means secure us, and our mere defects

Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,

The food of thy abused father’s wrath-

Might I but live to see thee in my touch

I’d say I had eyes again.

OLD MAN

How, now? Who’s there?

EDGAR (aside)

O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at the worst’?

I am worse than e’er I was.

OLD MAN (to Gloucester)

’Tis poor mad Tom.

EDGAR (aside)

And worse I may be yet. The worst is not

So long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’

OLD MAN (to Edgar) Fellow, where goest?

GLOUCESTER Is it a beggarman?

OLD MAN Madman and beggar too.

GLOUCESTER

A has some reason, else he could not beg.

I’th’ last night’s storm I such a fellow saw,

Which made me think a man a worm. My son

Came then into my mind, and yet my mind

Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more

since.

As flies to wanton boys are we to th’ gods;

They kill us for their sport.

EDGAR (aside) How should this be?

Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,

Ang’ring itself and others.

⌈He comes forward⌉





Bless thee, master.

GLOUCESTER

Is that the naked fellow?

OLD MAN

Ay, my lord.

GLOUCESTER

Get thee away. If for my sake

Thou wilt o‘ertake us hence a mile or twain

I’th’ way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,

And bring some covering for this naked soul,

Which I’ll entreat to lead me.

OLD MAN

Alack, sir, he is mad.

GLOUCESTER

’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.

Do as I bid thee; or rather do thy pleasure.

Above the rest, be gone.

OLD MAN

I’ll bring him the best ’parel that I have, so

Come on’t what will. Exit

GLOUCESTER

Sirrah, naked fellow!

EDGAR

Poor Tom’s a-cold. (Aside) I cannot daub it further.

GLOUCESTER

Come hither, fellow.

EDGAR (aside)

And yet I must.

(To Gloucester) Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

GLOUCESTER

Know’st thou the way to Dover?

EDGAR Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, goodman’s son, from the foul fiend.

GLOUCESTER

Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’

plagues

Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched

Makes thee the happier. Heavens deal so still.

Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man

That slaves your ordinance, that will not see

Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly.

So distribution should undo excess,

And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

EDGAR Ay, master.

GLOUCESTER

There is a cliff whose high and bending head

Looks fearfully in the confined deep.

Bring me but to the very brim of it

And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear

With something rich about me. From that place

I shall no leading need.

EDGAR Give me thy arm.

Poor Tom shall lead thee.

Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





4.2 Enter Goneril and Edmond the bastard ⌈at one door⌉ and Oswald the steward ⌈at another⌉



GONERIL

Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband

Not met us on the way. (To Oswald) Now, where’s

your master?

OSWALD

Madam, within; but never man so changed.

I told him of the army that was landed;

He smiled at it. I told him you were coming;

His answer was ‘The worse’. Of Gloucester’s treachery

And of the loyal service of his son

When I informed him, then he called me sot,

And told me I had turned the wrong side out.

What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;

What like, offensive.

GONERIL (to Edmond) Then shall you go no further.

It is the cowish terror of his spirit

That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs

Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way

May prove effects. Back, Edmond, to my brother.

Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.

I must change names at home, and give the distaff

Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant

Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear,

If you dare venture in your own behalf,

A mistress’s command. Wear this. Spare speech.

Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,

Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.

⌈She kisses him⌉





Conceive, and fare thee well.

EDMOND Yours in the ranks of death.

GONERIL My most dear Gloucester.

Exit Edmond

O, the difference of man and man!

To thee a woman’s services are due;

My fool usurps my body.

OSWALD

Madam, here comes my lord.

Enter the Duke of Albany





GONERIL

I have been worth the whistling.

ALBANY

O Goneril,

You are not worth the dust which the rude wind

Blows in your face.

GONERIL

Milk-livered man,

That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;

Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning

Thine honour from thy suffering—

ALBANY

See thyself, devil.

Proper deformity shows not in the fiend

So horrid as in woman.

GONERIL

O vain fool!

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER

O my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead,

Slain by his servant going to put out

The other eye of Gloucester.

ALBANY

Gloucester’s eyes?

MESSENGER

A servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse,

Opposed against the act, bending his sword

To his great master, who thereat enraged

Flew on him, and amongst them felled him dead,

But not without that harmful stroke which since

Hath plucked him after.

ALBANY

This shows you are above,

You justicers, that these our nether crimes

So speedily can venge. But O, poor Gloucester!

Lost he his other eye?

MESSENGER

Both, both, my lord.—µ

This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.

’Tis from your sister.

GONERIL (aside)

One way I like this well;

But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,

May all the building in my fancy pluck

Upon my hateful life. Another way

The news is not so tart.—I’ll read and answer.

⌈Exit with Oswald⌉





ALBANY

Where was his son when they did take his eyes?

MESSENGER

Come with my lady hither.

ALBANY

He is not here.

MESSENGER

No, my good lord; I met him back again.

ALBANY Knows he the wickedness?

MESSENGER

Ay, my good lord; ’twas he informed against him,

And quit the house on purpose that their punishment

Might have the freer course.

ALBANY

Gloucester, I live

To thank thee for the love thou showed‘st the King,

And to revenge thine eyes.—Come hither, friend.

Tell me what more thou know’st.

Exeunt





4.3 Enter with a drummer and colours, Queen Cordelia, Gentlemen, and soldiers



CORDELIA

Alack, ’tis he! Why, he was met even now,

As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud,

Crowned with rank fumitor and furrow-weeds,

With burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,

Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow

In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.

Search every acre in the high-grown field,

And bring him to our eye.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

What can man’s wisdom

In the restoring his

He that helps him take all my outward worth.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN There is means, madam.

Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,

The which he lacks. That to provoke in him

Are many simples operative, whose power

Will close the eye of anguish.

CORDELIA

All blest secrets,

All you unpublished virtues of the earth,

Spring with my tears, be aidant and remediate

In the good man’s distress!—Seek, seek for him,

Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life

That wants the means to lead it.

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER

News, madam.

The British powers are marching hitherward.

CORDELIA

’Tis known before; our preparation stands

In expectation of them.—O dear father,

It is thy business that I go about;

Therefore great France

My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied.

No blown ambition doth our arms incite,

But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right.

Soon may I hear and see him!

Exeunt





4.4 Enter Regan and Oswald the steward



REGAN

But are my brother’s powers set forth?

OSWALD

Ay, madam.

REGAN

Himself in person there?

OSWALD

Madam, with much ado.

Your sister is the better soldier.

REGAN

Lord Edmond spake not with your lord at home?

OSWALD No, madam.

REGAN

What might import my sister’s letters to him?

OSWALD I know not, lady.

REGAN

Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.

It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,

To let him live. Where he arrives he moves

All hearts against us. Edmond, I think, is gone,

In pity of his misery, to dispatch

His ‘nighted life, moreover to descry

The strength o’th’ enemy.

OSWALD

I must needs after, madam, with my letter.

REGAN

Our troops set forth tomorrow. Stay with us.

The ways are dangerous.

OSWALD

I may not, madam.

My lady charged my duty in this business.

REGAN

Why should she write to Edmond? Might not you

Transport her purposes by word? Belike—

Some things—I know not what. I’ll love thee much:

Let me unseal the letter.

OSWALD

Madam, I had rather—

REGAN

I know your lady does not love her husband.

I am sure of that, and at her late being here

She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks

To noble Edmond. I know you are of her bosom.

OSWALD I, madam?

REGAN

I speak in understanding. Y’are, I know’t.

Therefore I do advise you take this note.

My lord is dead. Edmond and I have talked,

And more convenient is he for my hand

Than for your lady’s. You may gather more.

If you do find him, pray you give him this,

And when your mistress hears thus much from you,

I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.

So, fare you well.

If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,

Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

OSWALD

Would I could meet him, madam. I should show

What party I do follow.

REGAN

Fare thee well.

Exeunt severally





4.5 Enter Edgar disguised as a peasant, with a staff, guiding the blind Duke of Gloucester



GLOUCESTER

When shall I come to th’ top of that same hill?

EDGAR

You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.

GLOUCESTER

Methinks the ground is even.

EDGAR

Horrible steep.

Hark, do you hear the sea?

GLOUCESTER

No, truly.

EDGAR

Why, then your other senses grow imperfect

By your eyes’ anguish.

GLOUCESTER

So may it be indeed.

Methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak’st

In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

EDGAR

You’re much deceived. In nothing am I changed

But in my garments.

GLOUCESTER

Methinks you’re better spoken.

EDGAR

Come on, sir, here’s the place. Stand still. How fearful

And dizzy ‘tis to cast one’s eyes so low!

The crows and choughs that wing the midway air

Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down

Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!

Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.

The fishermen that walk upon the beach

Appear like mice, and yon tall anchoring barque

Diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy

Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge

That on th’unnumbered idle pebble chafes

Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more,

Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight

Topple down headlong.

GLOUCESTER

Set me where you stand.

EDGAR

Give me your hand. You are now within a foot

Of th’extreme verge. For all beneath the moon

Would I not leap upright.

GLOUCESTER

Let go my hand.

Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel

Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods

Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off.

Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

EDGAR

Now fare ye well, good sir.

He stands aside





GLOUCESTER

With all my heart.

EDGAR (aside)

Why I do trifle thus with his despair

Is done to cure it.

GLOUCESTER (keeling) O you mighty gods,

This world I do renounce, and in your sights

Shake patiently my great affliction off!

If I could bear it longer, and not fall

To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,

My snuff and loathed part of nature should

Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O bless him!—

Now, fellow, fare thee well.

EDGAR

Gone, sir. Farewell.

Gloucester falls forward





(Aside) And yet I know not how conceit may rob

The treasury of life, when life itself

Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,

By this had thought been past.—Alive or dead?

(To Gloucester) Ho, you, sir, friend; hear you, sir?

Speak.

(Aside) Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.

(To Gloucester) What are you, sir?

GLOUCESTER

Away, and let me die.

EDGAR

Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,

So many fathom down precipitating

Thou‘dst shivered like an egg. But thou dost breathe,

Hast heavy substance, bleed’st not, speak’st, art sound.

Ten masts a-length make not the altitude

Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.

Thy life’s a miracle. Speak yet again.

GLOUCESTER But have I fall’n, or no?

EDGAR

From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.

Look up a-height. The shrill-gorged lark so far

Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.

GLOUCESTER Alack, I have no eyes.

Is wretchedness deprived that benefit

To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort

When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage

And frustrate his proud will.

EDGAR

Give me your arm.

Up, so. How is’t? Feel you your legs? You stand.

GLOUCESTER

Too well, too well.

EDGAR

This is above all strangeness.

Upon the crown o’th’ cliff what thing was that

Which parted from you?

GLOUCESTER

A poor unfortunate beggar.

EDGAR

As I stood here below, methoughts his eyes

Were two full moons. He had a thousand noses,

Horns whelked and waved like the enraged sea.

It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,

Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours

Of men’s impossibilities, have preserved thee.

GLOUCESTER

I do remember now. Henceforth I’ll bear

Affliction till it do cry out itself

‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of,

I took it for a man. Often ‘twould say

‘The fiend, the fiend!’ He led me to that place.

EDGAR

Bear free and patient thoughts.

Enter King Lear mad, ⌈crowned with weeds and flowers⌉

But who comes here?

The safer sense will ne’er accommodate

His master thus.

LEAR No, they cannot touch me for crying. I am the King himself.

EDGAR O thou side-piercing sight!

LEAR Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper. Draw me a clothier’s yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted cheese will do’t. There’s my gauntlet. I’ll prove it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird, i‘th’ clout, i’th’ clout! Whew! Give the word.

EDGAR Sweet marjoram.

LEAR Pass.

GLOUCESTER I know that voice.

LEAR Ha! Goneril with a white beard? They flattered me like a dog, and told me I had the white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. To say ‘ay’ and ‘no’ to everything that I said ‘ay’ and ‘no’ to was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found ‘em, there I smelt ’em out. Go to, they are not men o’ their words. They told me I was everything; ’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

GLOUCESTER

The trick of that voice I do well remember.

Is’t not the King?

LEAR

Ay, every inch a king.

⌈Gloucester kneels⌉





When I do stare, see how the subject quakes!

I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause?

Adultery? Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery!

No, the wren goes to‘t, and the small gilded fly

Does lecher in my sight. Let copulation thrive,

For Gloucester’s bastard son

Was kinder to his father than my daughters

Got ’tween the lawful sheets. To‘t, luxury, pell-mell,

For I lack soldiers. Behold yon simp’ring dame,

Whose face between her forks presages snow,

That minces virtue, and does shake the head

To hear of pleasure’s name.

The fitchew nor the soilèd horse goes to’t

With a more riotous appetite. Down from the waist

They’re centaurs, though women all above.

But to the girdle do the gods inherit;

Beneath is all the fiend’s. There’s hell, there’s darkness,

there is the sulphurous pit, burning, scalding, stench,

consumption. Fie, fie, fie; pah, pah! Give me an ounce

of civet, good apothecary, sweeten my imagination.

There’s money for thee.

GLOUCESTER

O, let me kiss that hand!

LEAR Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.

GLOUCESTER

O ruined piece of nature! This great world

Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?

LEAR I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?

No, do thy worst, blind Cupid, I’ll not love.

Read thou this challenge. Mark but the penning of it.

GLOUCESTER

Were all thy letters suns, I could not see.

EDGAR (aside)

I would not take this from report; it is,

And my heart breaks at it.

LEAR (to Gloucester) Read.

GLOUCESTER What—with the case of eyes?

LEAR O ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how this world goes.

GLOUCESTER I see it feelingly.

LEAR What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes with no eyes; look with thine ears. See how yon justice rails upon yon simple thief. Hark in thine ear: change places, and handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer’s dog bark at a beggar?

GLOUCESTER Ay, sir.

LEAR An the creature run from the cur, there thou mightst behold the great image of authority. A dog’s obeyed in office.

Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand.

Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thy own back.

Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind

For which thou whip‘st her. The usurer hangs the

cozener.

Through tattered clothes great vices do appear;

Robes and furred gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,

And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;

Arm it in rags, a pygmy’s straw does pierce it.

None does offend, none, I say none. I’ll able ’em.

Take that of me, my friend, who have the power

To seal th’accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes,

And, like a scurvy politician, seem

To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now!

Pull off my boots. Harder, harder! So.

EDGAR (aside)

O, matter and impertinency mixed—170

Reason in madness!

LEAR

If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.

I know thee well enough: thy name is Gloucester.

Thou must be patient. We came crying hither.

Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air

We waul and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.

GLOUCESTER Alack, alack the day!

LEAR ⌈removing his crown of weeds⌉

When we are born, we cry that we are come

To this great stage of fools. This’ a good block.

It were a delicate stratagem to shoe 180

A troop of horse with felt. I’ll put’t in proof,

And when I have stol’n upon these son-in-laws,

Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

Enter ⌈two ⌉Gentlemen





⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

O, here he is. Lay hand upon him. ⌈To Lear⌉Sir,

Your most dear daughter—

LEAR

No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even

The natural fool of fortune. Use me well.

You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;

I am cut to th’ brains.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN You shall have anything.

LEAR No seconds? All myself?

Why, this would make a man a man of salt,

To use his eyes for garden water-pots.

I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. What,

I will be jovial. Come, come, I am a king.

Masters, know you that?

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

You are a royal one, and we obey you.

LEAR Then there’s life in’t. Come, an you get it, you shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa!

Exit running ⌈pursued by a Gentleman⌉

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,

Past speaking in a king. Thou hast a daughter

Who redeems nature from the general curse

Which twain have brought her to.

EDGAR Hail, gentle sir.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN Sir, speed you. What’s your will?

EDGAR

Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?

⌈FIRST⌉+GENTLEMAN

Most sure and vulgar, everyone hears that

That can distinguish sound.

EDGAR But, by your favour,

How near’s the other army?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN,

Near and on speedy foot. The main descry

Stands in the hourly thought.

EDGAR

I thank you, sir. That’s all.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

Though that the Queen on special cause is here,

Her army is moved on.

EDGAR

I thank you, sir. Exit Gentleman

GLOUCESTER

You ever gentle gods, take my breath from me.

Let not my worser spirit tempt me again

To die before you please.

EDGAR Well pray you, father.

GLOUCESTER Now, good sir, what are you?

EDGAR

A most poor man, made tame to fortune’s blows,

Who by the art of known and feeling sorrows

Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,

I’ll lead you to some biding.

GLOUCESTER ⌈rising⌉

Hearty thanks.

The bounty and the benison of heaven

To boot and boot.

Enter Oswald the steward





OSWALD

A proclaimed prize! Most happy!

That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh

To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,

Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out

That must destroy thee.

GLOUCESTER

Now let thy friendly hand

Put strength enough to’t.

OSWALD (to Edgar)

Wherefore, bold peasant,

Durst thou support a published traitor? Hence,

Lest that th’infection of his fortune take

Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

EDGAR ‘Chill not let go, sir, without vurther ’cagion.

OSWALD Let go, slave, or thou diest.

EDGAR Good gentleman, go your gate, and let poor volk pass. An ‘chud ha’ been swaggered out of my life, ’twould not ha’ been so long as ‘tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th’old man. Keep out, ‘che vor’ ye, or I’s’ try whether your costard or my baton be the harder; I’ll be plain with you.

OSWALD Out, dunghill!

EDGAR ’Chill pick your teeth, sir. Come, no matter vor your foins.

⌈Edgar knocks him down⌉





OSWALD

Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.

If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,

And give the letters which thou find’st about me

To Edmond, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out

Upon the English party. O untimely death! Death!

He dies

EDGAR

I know thee well—a serviceable villain,

As duteous to the vices of thy mistress

As badness would desire.

GLOUCESTER What, is he dead?

EDGAR Sit you down, father. Rest you.

Gloucester sits





Let’s see these pockets. The letters that he speaks of

May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorrow

He had no other deathsman. Let us see.

Leave, gentle wax, and manners; blame us not.

To know our enemies’ minds we rip their hearts;

Their papers is more lawful.

He reads the letter





’Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have

many opportunities to cut him off. If your will want

not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is

nothing done if he return the conqueror; then am I

the prisoner, and his bed my jail, from the loathed

warmth whereof, deliver me, and supply the place for

your labour.

Your—wife, so I would say,—affectionate

servant, and for you her own for venture,



Goneril.’





O indistinguished space of woman’s will—

A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life,

And the exchange my brother!—Here in the sands

Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified

Of murderous lechers, and in the mature time

With this ungracious paper strike the sight

Of the death-practised Duke. For him ’tis well

That of thy death and business I can tell.

⌈Exit with the body⌉

GLOUCESTER

The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense,

That I stand up and have ingenious feeling

Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distraught,

So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,

Drum afar off





And woes by wrong imaginations lose

The knowledge of themselves.

⌈Enter Edgar⌉





EDGAR

Give me your hand.

Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.

Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.

Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





4.6 Enter Queen Cordelia, the Earl of Kent disguised, and ⌈the First⌉ Gentleman



CORDELIA

O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work

To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,

And every measure fail me.

KENT

To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid.

All my reports go with the modest truth,

Nor more, nor clipped, but so.

CORDELIA

Be better suited.

These weeds are memories of those worser hours.

I prithee put them off.

KENT Pardon, dear madam.

Yet to be known shortens my made intent.

My boon I make it that you know me not

Till time and I think meet.

CORDELIA

Then be’t so, my good lord.—

How does the King?

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN Madam, sleeps still.

CORDELIA

O you kind gods,

Cure this great breach in his abused nature;

Th’untuned and jarring senses O wind up

Of this child-changed father!

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

So please your majesty

That we may wake the King? He hath slept long.

CORDELIA

Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed

I’th’ sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep

We put fresh garments on him.

Enter King Lear asleep, in a chair carried by servants





Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.

I doubt not of his temperance.

CORDELIA

O my dear father, restoration hang

Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss

Repair those violent harms that my two sisters

Have in thy reverence made!

KENT

Kind and dear princess!

CORDELIA

Had you not been their father, these white flakes

Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face

To be opposed against the warring winds?

Mine enemy’s dog, though he had bit me, should

have stood

That night against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor

father,

To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn

In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,

’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once

Had not concluded all! (To the Gentleman) He wakes.

Speak to him.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.

CORDELIA (to Lear)

How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?

LEAR

You do me wrong to take me out o’th’ grave.

Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound

Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears

Do scald like molten lead.

CORDELIA

Sir, do you know me?

LEAR

You are a spirit, I know. Where did you die?

CORDELIA (to the Gentleman) Still, still far wide!

⌈FIRST GENTLEMAN

He’s scarce awake. Let him alone a while.

LEAR

Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?

I am mightily abused. I should ev’n die with pity

To see another thus. I know not what to say.

I will not swear these are my hands. Let’s see:

I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured

Of my condition.

CORDELIA (kneeling) O look upon me, sir,

And hold your hands in benediction o’er me.

You must not kneel.

LEAR

Pray do not mock.

I am a very foolish, fond old man,

Fourscore and upward,

Not an hour more nor less; and to deal plainly,

I fear I am not in my perfect mind.

Methinks I should know you, and know this man;

Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant

What place this is; and all the skill I have

Remembers not these garments; nor I know not

Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,

For as I am a man, I think this lady

To be my child, Cordelia.

CORDELIA

And so I am, I am.

LEAR

Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray, weep not.

If you have poison for me, I will drink it.

I know you do not love me; for your sisters

Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.

You have some cause; they have not.

CORDELIA

No cause, no cause.

LEAR Am I in France?

KENT In your own kingdom, sir.

LEAR Do not abuse me.

⌈FIRST⌉GENTLEMAN

Be comforted, good madam. The great rage

You see is killed in him. Desire him to go in.

Trouble him no more till further settling.

CORDELIA (to Lear) Will’t please your highness walk?

LEAR

You must bear with me. Pray you now, forget

And forgive. I am old and foolish.

Exeunt





5.1 Enter with a drummer and colours Edmond, Regan, Gentlemen, and soldiers



EDMOND

Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,

Or whether since he is advised by aught

To change the course. He’s full of abdication

And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.

Exit one or more

REGAN

Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.

EDMOND

’Tis to be doubted, madam.

REGAN

Now, sweet lord,

You know the goodness I intend upon you.

Tell me but truly—but then speak the truth-

Do you not love my sister?

EDMOND

In honoured love.

REGAN

But have you never found my brother’s way

To the forfended place?

EDMOND

No, by mine honour, madam.

REGAN

I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,

Be not familiar with her.

EDMOND Fear me not.

She and the Duke her husband—

Enter with a drummer and colours the Duke of Albany, Goneril, and soldiers





ALBANY (to Regan)

Our very loving sister, well bemet.

(To Edmond) Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his

daughter,

With others whom the rigour of our state

Forced to cry out.

REGAN

Why is this reasoned?

GONERIL

Combine together ’gainst the enemy;

For these domestic and particular broils

Are not the question here.

ALBANY

Let’s then determine with th’ensign of war

On our proceeding.

REGAN

Sister, you’ll go with us?

GONERIL No.

REGAN

’Tis most convenient. Pray go with us.

GONERIL (aside)

O ho, I know the riddle! (To Regan) I will go.

Enter Edgar disguised as a peasant





EDGAR (to Albany)

If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor,

Hear me one word.

ALBANY (to the others) I’ll overtake you.

Exeunt both the armies

Speak.

EDGAR

Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.

If you have victory, let the trumpet sound

For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,

I can produce a champion that will prove

What is avouchèd there. If you miscarry,

Your business of the world hath so an end,

And machination ceases. Fortune love you.

ALBANY

Stay till I have read the letter.

EDGAR

I was forbid it.

When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,

And I’ll appear again.

ALBANY Why, fare thee well.

I will o’erlook thy paper.

Exit Edgar

Enter Edmond





EDMOND

The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers.

He ⌈offers⌉Albany a paper





Here is the guess of their true strength and forces

By diligent discovery; but your haste

Is now urged on you.

ALBANY

We will greet the time.

Exit

EDMOND

To both these sisters have I sworn my love,

Each jealous of the other as the stung

Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?—

Both?—one?—or neither? Neither can be enjoyed

If both remain alive. To take the widow

Exasperates, makes mad, her sister Goneril,

And hardly shall I carry out my side,

Her husband being alive. Now then, we’ll use

His countenance for the battle, which being done,

Let her who would be rid of him devise

His speedy taking off. As for the mercy

Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,

The battle done, and they within our power,

Shall never see his pardon; for my state

Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

Exit





5.2 Alarum within. Enter with a drummer and colours King Lear, Queen Cordelia, and soldiers over the stage; and exeunt. Enter Edgar disguised as a peasant, guiding the blind Duke of Gloucester



EDGAR

Here, father, take the shadow of this tree

For your good host; pray that the right may thrive.

If ever I return to you again

I’ll bring you comfort.

GLOUCESTER

Grace go with you, sir.

Exit Edgar

Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar





EDGAR

Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away.

King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en.

Give me thy hand. Come on.

GLOUCESTER

No further, sir. A man may rot even here.

EDGAR

What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure

Their going hence even as their coming hither.

Ripeness is all. Come on.

GLOUCESTER

And that’s true, too.

Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





5.3 Enter in conquest with a drummer and colours Edmond; King Lear and Queen Cordelia as prisoners; soldiers; a Captain



EDMOND

Some officers take them away. Good guard

Until their greater pleasures first be known

That are to censure them.

CORDELIA (to Lear)

We are not the first

Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.

For thee, oppressed King, I am cast down,

Myself could else outfrown false fortune’s frown.

Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

LEAR

No, no, no, no. Come, let’s away to prison.

We two alone will sing like birds i’th’ cage.

When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down

And ask of thee forgiveness; so we’ll live,

And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh

At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues

Talk of court news, and we’ll talk with them too—

Who loses and who wins, who’s in, who’s out,

And take upon ’s the mystery of things

As if we were God’s spies; and we’ll wear out

In a walled prison packs and sects of great ones

That ebb and flow by th’ moon.

EDMOND (to soldiers)

Take them away.

LEAR

Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,

The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught

thee?

He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven

And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.

The goodyear shall devour them, flesh and fell,

Ere they shall make us weep. We’ll see ’em starved

first. Come. Exeunt all but Edmond and the Captain

EDMOND Come hither, captain. Hark.

Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison.

One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost

As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way

To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men

Are as the time is. To be tender-minded

Does not become a sword. Thy great employment

Will not bear question. Either say thou‘It do’t,

Or thrive by other means.

CAPTAIN

I’ll do’t, my lord.

EDMOND

About it, and write ‘happy’ when thou’st done.

Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so

As I have set it down.

Exit the Captain

Flourish. Enter the Duke of Albany, Goneril, Regan, ⌈drummer, trumpeter⌉ and soldiers





ALBANY

Sir, you have showed today your valiant strain,

And fortune led you well. You have the captives

Who were the opposites of this day’s strife.

I do require them of you, so to use them

As we shall find their merits and our safety

May equally determine.

EDMOND

Sir, I thought it fit

To send the old and miserable King

To some retention and appointed guard,

Whose age had charms in it, whose title more,

To pluck the common bosom on his side

And turn our impressed lances in our eyes

Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,

My reason all the same, and they are ready

Tomorrow, or at further space, t’appear

Where you shall hold your session.

ALBANY

Sir, by your patience,

I hold you but a subject of this war,

Not as a brother.

REGAN

That’s as we list to grace him.

Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded

Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,

Bore the commission of my place and person,

The which immediacy may well stand up

And call itself your brother.

GONERIL

Not so hot.

In his own grace he doth exalt himself

More than in your addition.

REGAN

In my rights

By me invested, he compeers the best.

ALBANY

That were the most if he should husband you.

REGAN

Jesters do oft prove prophets.

GONERIL

Holla, holla—

That eye that told you so looked but asquint.

REGAN

Lady, I am not well, else I should answer

From a full-flowing stomach. (To Edmond) General,

Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony.

Dispose of them, of me. The walls is thine.

Witness the world that I create thee here

My lord and master.

GONERIL

Mean you to enjoy him?

ALBANY

The let-alone lies not in your good will.

EDMOND

Nor in thine, lord.

ALBANY

Half-blooded fellow, yes.

REGAN (to Edmond)

Let the drum strike and prove my title thine.

ALBANY

Stay yet, hear reason. Edmond, I arrest thee

On capital treason, and in thy attaint

This gilded serpent. (To Regan) For your claim, fair

sister,

I bar it in the interest of my wife.

’Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,

And I, her husband, contradict your banns.

If you will marry, make your loves to me.

My lady is bespoke.

GONERIL

An interlude!

ALBANY

Thou art armed, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.

If none appear to prove upon thy person

Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,

There is my pledge.

⌈He throws down a glove⌉





I’ll make it on thy heart,

Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less

Than I have here proclaimed thee.

REGAN Sick, O sick!

GONERIL (aside) If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.

EDMOND (to Albany, ⌈throwing down a glovel⌉

There’s my exchange. What in the world he is

That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.

Call by the trumpet. He that dares, approach;

On him, on you,—who not?—I will maintain

My truth and honour firmly.

ALBANY

A herald, ho!

Enter a Herald





(To Edmond) Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,

All levied in my name, have in my name

Took their discharge.

REGAN

My sickness grows upon me.

ALBANY

She is not well. Convey her to my tent.

Exit one or more with Regan

Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,

And read out this.

A trumpet sounds





HERALD (reads) ‘If any man of quality or degree within the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmond, supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.’

First trumpet





Again.

Second trumpet





Again.

Third trumpet.

Trumpet answers within. Enter Edgar, armed





ALBANY (to the Herald)

Ask him his purposes, why he appears

Upon this call o’th’ trumpet.

HERALD (to Edgar)

What are you?

Your name, your quality, and why you answer

This present summons?

EDGAR

Know, my name is lost,

By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.

Yet am I noble as the adversary

I come to cope.

ALBANY

Which is that adversary?

EDGAR

What’s he that speaks for Edmond, Earl of Gloucester?

EDMOND

Himself. What sayst thou to him?

EDGAR

Draw thy sword,

That if my speech offend a noble heart

Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.

He draws his sword





Behold, it is the privilege of mine honour,

My oath, and my profession. I protest,

Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,

Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune,

Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor,

False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father,

Conspirant ‘gainst this high illustrious prince,

And from th’extremest upward of thy head

To the descent and dust below thy foot

A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou no,

This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent

To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,

Thou liest.

EDMOND

In wisdom I should ask thy name,

But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,

And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,

What safe and nicely I might well demand

By rule of knighthood I disdain and spurn.

Back do I toss those treasons to thy head,

With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart,

Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,

This sword of mine shall give them instant way

Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!

Alarums. They fight. Edmond is vanquished





⌈ALL⌉

Save him, save him!

GONERIL

This is practice, Gloucester.

By th’ law of arms thou wast not bound to answer

An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,

But cozened and beguiled.

ALBANY

Shut your mouth, dame,

Or with this paper shall I stopple it.

⌈To Edmond⌉ Hold, sir, thou worse than any name:

read thine own evil.

(To Goneril) No tearing, lady. I perceive you know it.

GONERIL

Say if I do, the laws are mine, not thine.

Who can arraign me for’t?

Exit

ALBANY Most monstrous!—

O, know’st thou this paper?

EDMOND

Ask me not what I know.

ALBANY

Go after her. She’s desperate. Govern her.

Exit one or more





EDMOND

What you have charged me with, that have I done,

And more, much more. The time will bring it out.

‘Tis past, and so am I. (To Edgar) But what art thou,

That hast this fortune on me? If thou’rt noble,

I do forgive thee.

EDGAR

Let’s exchange charity.

I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmond.

If more, the more thou’st wronged me.

⌈He takes off his helmet⌉





My name is Edgar, and thy father’s son.

The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices

Make instruments to plague us.

The dark and vicious place where thee he got

Cost him his eyes.

EDMOND

Thou‘st spoken right. ’Tis true.

The wheel is come full circle. I am here.

ALBANY (to Edgar)

Methought thy very gait did prophesy

A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.

Let sorrow split my heart if ever I

Did hate thee or thy father.

EDGAR Worthy prince, I know’t.

ALBANY Where have you hid yourself?

How have you known the miseries of your father?

EDGAR

By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,

And when ‘tis told, O that my heart would burst!

The bloody proclamation to escape

That followed me so near—O, our lives’ sweetness,

That we the pain of death would hourly die

Rather than die at once!—taught me to shift

Into a madman’s rags, t’assume a semblance

That very dogs disdained; and in this habit

Met I my father with his bleeding rings,

Their precious stones new-lost; became his guide,

Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair;

Never—O fault!—revealed myself unto him

Until some half hour past, when I was armed.

Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,

I asked his blessing, and from first to last

Told him our pilgrimage; but his flawed heart—

Alack, too weak the conflict to support—

’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,

Burst smilingly.

EDMOND

This speech of yours hath moved me,

And shall perchance do good. But speak you on—

You look as you had something more to say.

ALBANY

If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,

For I am almost ready to dissolve,

Hearing of this.

Enter a Gentleman with a bloody knife





GENTLEMAN

Help, help, O help!

EDGAR

What kind of help?

ALBANY

Speak, man.

EDGAR

What means this bloody knife?

GENTLEMAN

’Tis hot, it smokes.

It came even from the heart of—O, she’s dead!

ALBANY Who dead? Speak, man.

GENTLEMAN

Your lady, sir, your lady; and her sister

By her is poisoned. She confesses it.

EDMOND

I was contracted to them both; all three

Now marry in an instant.

EDGAR

Here comes Kent.

Enter the Earl of Kent as himself





ALBANY

Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead.

Goneril’s and Regan’s bodies brought out





This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble,

Touches us not with pity.—O, is this he?

(To Kent) The time will not allow the compliment

Which very manners urges.

KENT

I am come

To bid my king and master aye good night.

Is he not here?

ALBANY

Great thing of us forgot!—

Speak, Edmond; where’s the King, and where’s

Cordelia?-

Seest thou this object, Kent?

KENT Alack, why thus?

EDMOND Yet Edmond was beloved.

The one the other poisoned for my sake,

And after slew herself.

ALBANY

Even so.—Cover their faces.

EDMOND

I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,

Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,

Be brief in it, to th’ castle; for my writ

Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.

Nay, send in time.

ALBANY

Run, run, O run!

EDGAR

To who, my lord?—Who has the office? Send Thy token of reprieve.

EDMOND

Well thought on! Take my sword. The captain, Give it the captain.

EDGAR

Haste thee for thy life.

Exit ⌈the Gentleman⌉

EDMOND (to Albany)

He hath commission from thy wife and me

To hang Cordelia in the prison, and

To lay the blame upon her own despair,

That she fordid herself.

ALBANY

The gods defend her!—Bear him hence a while.

Exeunt some with Edmond

Enter King Lear with Queen Cordelia in his arms,

⌈followed by the Gentleman⌉





LEAR

Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones.

Had I your tongues and eyes, I’d use them so

That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone for ever.

I know when one is dead and when one lives.

She’s dead as earth.

⌈He lays her down⌉





Lend me a looking-glass.

If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,

Why, then she lives.

KENT

Is this the promised end?

EDGAR

Or image of that horror?

ALBANY

Fall and cease.

LEAR

This feather stirs. She lives. If it be so,

It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows

That ever I have felt.

KENT ⌈kneeling⌉

O, my good master!

LEAR

Prithee, away.

EDGAR

’Tis noble Kent, your friend.

LEAR

A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all.

I might have saved her; now she’s gone for ever.-

Cordelia, Cordelia: stay a little. Ha?

What is’t thou sayst?—Her voice was ever soft,

Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.—

I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.

GENTLEMAN

’Tis true, my lords, he did.

LEAR

Did I not, fellow?

I have seen the day with my good biting falchion

I would have made them skip. I am old now,

And these same crosses spoil me. (To Kent) Who are

you?

Mine eyes are not o’th’ best, I’ll tell you straight.

KENT

If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,

One of them we behold.

LEAR

This’ a dull sight.

Are you not Kent?

KENT The same, your servant Kent.

Where is your servant Caius?

LEAR

He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that.

He’ll strike, and quickly too. He’s dead and rotten.

KENT

No, my good lord, I am the very man—

LEAR I’ll see that straight.

KENT

That from your first of difference and decay

Have followed your sad steps.

LEAR

You’re welcome hither.

KENT

Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark, and deadly.

Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,

And desperately are dead.

LEAR

Ay, so think I.

ALBANY

He knows not what he says; and vain is it

That we present us to him.

Enter a Messenger





EDGAR

Very bootless.

MESSENGER (to Albany)

Edmond is dead, my lord.

ALBANY

That’s but a trifle here.—

You lords and noble friends, know our intent.

What comfort to this great decay may come

Shall be applied; for us, we will resign

During the life of this old majesty

To him our absolute power;

(To Edgar and Kent) you to your rights,

With boot and such addition as your honours

Have more than merited. All friends shall taste

The wages of their virtue, and all foes

The cup of their deservings.—O see, see!

LEAR

And my poor fool is hanged. No, no, no life?

Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,

And thou no breath at all? Thou’lt come no more.

Never, never, never, never, never.

⌈To Kent⌉ Pray you, undo this button. Thank you, sir.

Do you see this? Look on her. Look, her lips.

Look there, look there. He dies

EDGAR

He faints. (To Lear) My lord, my lord!

KENT ⌈to Lear⌉

Break, heart, I prithee break.

EDGAR (to Lear)

Look up, my lord.

KENT

Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass. He hates him

That would upon the rack of this tough world

Stretch him out longer.

EDGAR

He is gone indeed.

KENT

The wonder is he hath endured so long.

He but usurped his life.

ALBANY

Bear them from hence. Our present business

Is general woe. (To Edgar and Kent) Friends of my

soul, you twain

Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.

KENT

I have a journey, sir, shortly to go:

My master calls me; I must not say no.

EDGAR

The weight of this sad time we must obey,

Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.

The oldest hath borne most. We that are young

Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

Exeunt with a dead march, carrying the bodies





