The Taming of the Shrew



Induction 1 Enter Christopher Sly the beggar, and the Hostess

SLY I’ll feeze you, in faith.

HOSTESS A pair of stocks, you rogue.

SLY You’re a baggage. The Slys are no rogues. Look in the Chronicles—we came in with Richard Conqueror, therefore paucas palabras, let the world slide. Sessa!

HOSTESS You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?

SLY No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy! Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.

HOSTESS I know my remedy, I must go fetch the headborough. Exit

SLY Third or fourth or fifth borough, I’ll answer him by law. I’ll not budge an inch, boy. Let him come, and kindly.

He falls asleep.



Horns sound. Enter a Lord from hunting, with his train





LORD

Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds.

Breathe Merriman—the poor cur is embossed—

And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.

Saw’st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good

At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?

I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.

FIRST HUNTSMAN

Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord.

He cried upon it at the merest loss,

And twice today picked out the dullest scent.

Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

LORD

Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet

I would esteem him worth a dozen such.

But sup them well, and look unto them all.

Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.

FIRST HUNTSMAN I will, my lord.

LORD (seeing Sly)

What’s here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?

SECOND HUNTSMAN

He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale

This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.

LORD

O monstrous beast! How like a swine he lies.

Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image.

Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.

What think you: if he were conveyed to bed,

Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,

A most delicious banquet by his bed,

And brave attendants near him when he wakes—

Would not the beggar then forget himself?

FIRST HUNTSMAN

Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.

SECOND HUNTSMAN

It would seem strange unto him when he waked.

LORD

Even as a flatt‘ring dream or worthless fancy.

Then take him up, and manage well the jest.

Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,

And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.

Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,

And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.

Procure me music ready when he wakes

To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound,

And if he chance to speak be ready straight,

And with a low submissive reverence

Say ‘What is it your honour will command?

Let one attend him with a silver basin

Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers;

Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,

And say ‘Will’t please your lordship cool your hands?’

Someone be ready with a costly suit,

And ask him what apparel he will wear.

Another tell him of his hounds and horse,

And that his lady mourns at his disease.

Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,

And when he says he is, say that he dreams,

For he is nothing but a mighty lord.

This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs.

It will be pastime passing excellent,

If it be husbanded with modesty.

FIRST HUNTSMAN

My lord, I warrant you we will play our part

As he shall think by our true diligence

He is no less than what we say he is.

LORD

Take him up gently, and to bed with him;

And each one to his office when he wakes.

Servingmen carry Sly out

Trumpets sound





Sirrah, go see what trumpet ’tis that sounds.

Exit a Servingman





Belike some noble gentleman that means,

Travelling some journey, to repose him here.

Enter a Servingman





How now? Who is it?

SERVINGMAN An’t please your honour, players That offer service to your lordship.

Enter Players





LORD

Bid them come near. Now fellows, you are welcome.

PLAYERS We thank your honour.

LORD

Do you intend to stay with me tonight?

A PLAYER

So please your lordship to accept our duty.

LORD

With all my heart. This fellow I remember

Since once he played a farmer’s eldest son.

’Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well.

I have forgot your name, but sure that part

Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.

ANOTHER PLAYER

I think ’twas Soto that your honour means.

LORD

‘Tis very true. Thou didst it excellent.

Well, you are come to me in happy time,

The rather for I have some sport in hand

Wherein your cunning can assist me much.

There is a lord will hear you play tonight;

But I am doubtful of your modesties

Lest, over-eyeing of his odd behaviour—

For yet his honour never heard a play—

You break into some merry passion,

And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,

If you should smile he grows impatient.

A PLAYER

Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves

Were he the veriest antic in the world.

LORD (to a Servingman)

Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery

And give them friendly welcome every one.

Let them want nothing that my house affords.

Exit one with the Players





(To a Servingman) Sirrah, go you to Barthol‘mew, my

page,

And see him dressed in all suits like a lady.

That done, conduct him to the drunkard’s chamber

And call him ‘madam’, do him obeisance.

Tell him from me, as he will win my love,

He bear himself with honourable action

Such as he hath observed in noble ladies

Unto their lords by them accomplished.

Such duty to the drunkard let him do

With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,

And say ‘What is’t your honour will command

Wherein your lady and your humble wife

May show her duty and make known her love?’

And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,

And with declining head into his bosom

Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed

To see her noble lord restored to health,

Who for this seven years hath esteemed him

No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.

And if the boy have not a woman’s gift

To rain a shower of commanded tears,

An onion will do well for such a shift,

Which, in a napkin being close conveyed,

Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.

See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst.

Anon I’ll give thee more instructions.

Exit a Servingman

I know the boy will well usurp the grace,

Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman.

I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,

And how my men will stay themselves from laughter

When they do homage to this simple peasant.

I’ll in to counsel them. Haply my presence

May well abate the over-merry spleen

Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

Exeunt



Induction 2 Enter aloft Sly, the drunkard, with attendants, some with apparel, basin, and ewer, and other appurtenances; and Lord

SLY For God’s sake, a pot of small ale!

FIRST SERVINGMAN

Will’t please your lordship drink a cup of sack?

SECOND SERVINGMAN

Will’t please your honour taste of these conserves?

THIRD SERVINGMAN

What raiment will your honour wear today?

SLY I am Christophero Sly. Call not me ‘honour’ nor ‘lordship’. I ne’er drank sack in my life, and if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. Ne’er ask me what raiment I’ll wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet—nay, sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.

LORD

Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour.

O that a mighty man of such descent,

Of such possessions and so high esteem,

Should be infused with so foul a spirit.

SLY What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly—old Sly’s son of Burton Heath, by birth a pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot, if she know me not. If she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying‘st knave in Christendom. What, I am not bestraught; here’s—

THIRD SERVINGMAN

O, this it is that makes your lady mourn.

SECOND SERVINGMAN

O, this is it that makes your servants droop.

LORD

Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,

As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.

O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth.

Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,

And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.

Look how thy servants do attend on thee,

Each in his office, ready at thy beck.

Wilt thou have music?

Music

Hark, Apollo plays,





And twenty caged nightingales do sing.

Or wilt thou sleep? We’ll have thee to a couch

Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed

On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.

Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground.

Or wilt thou ride, thy horses shall be trapped,

Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.

Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar

Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt,

Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them

And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

FIRST SERVINGMAN

Say thou wilt course, thy greyhounds are as swift

As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.

SECOND SERVINGMAN

Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight

Adonis painted by a running brook,

And Cytherea all in sedges hid,

Which seem to move and wanton with her breath

Even as the waving sedges play wi’th’ wind.

LORD

We’ll show thee Io as she was a maid,

And how she was beguiled and surprised,

As lively painted as the deed was done.

THIRD SERVINGMAN

Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,

Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,

And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,

So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.

LORD

Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord.

Thou hast a lady far more beautiful

Than any woman in this waning age.

FIRST SERVINGMAN

And till the tears that she hath shed for thee

Like envious floods o’errun her lovely face

She was the fairest creature in the world;

And yet she is inferior to none.

SLY

Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?

Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?

I do not sleep. I see, I hear, I speak.

I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things.

Upon my life, I am a lord indeed,

And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.

Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,

And once again a pot o’th’ smallest ale.

SECOND SERVINGMAN

Will’t please your mightiness to wash your hands?

O, how we joy to see your wit restored!

O that once more you knew but what you are!

These fifteen years you have been in a dream,

Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.

SLY

These fifteen years—by my fay, a goodly nap.

But did I never speak of all that time?

FIRST SERVINGMAN

O yes, my lord, but very idle words,

For though you lay here in this goodly chamber

Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door,

And rail upon the hostess of the house,

And say you would present her at the leet

Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts.

Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.

SLY Ay, the woman’s maid of the house.

THIRD SERVINGMAN

Why, sir, you know no house, nor no such maid,

Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,

As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greet,

And Peter Turf, and Henry Pimpernel,

And twenty more such names and men as these,

Which never were, nor no man ever saw.

SLY

Now Lord be thankèd for my good amends.

ALL Amen.

SLY I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.

Enter Bartholomew the Page, as Lady, with attendants





BARTHOLOMEW

How fares my noble lord?

SLY

Marry, I fare well,

For here is cheer enough. Where is my wife?

BARTHOLOMEW

Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?

SLY

Are you my wife, and will not call me husband?

My men should call me lord. I am your goodman.

BARTHOLOMEW

My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;

I am your wife in all obedience.

SLY

I know it well. (To the Lord) What must I call her?

LORD Madam.

SLY Al’ce Madam or Joan Madam?

LORD

Madam, and nothing else. So lords call ladies.

SLY

Madam wife, they say that I have dreamed,

And slept above some fifteen year or more.

BARTHOLOMEW

Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,

Being all this time abandoned from your bed.

SLY

Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.

Exeunt [Lord and] attendants

Madam, undress you and come now to bed.

BARTHOLOMEW

Thrice-noble lord, let me entreat of you

To pardon me yet for a night or two,

Or if not so, until the sun be set,

For your physicians have expressly charged,

In peril to incur your former malady,

That I should yet absent me from your bed.

I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

SLY Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER

Your honour’s players, hearing your amendment,

Are come to play a pleasant comedy,

For so your doctors hold it very meet,

Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood,

And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.

Therefore they thought it good you hear a play

And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,

Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.

SLY

Marry, I will let them play it. Is not a comonty

A Christmas gambol, or a tumbling trick?

BARTHOLOMEW

No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.

SLY

What, household stuff?

BARTHOLOMEW

It is a kind of history.

SLY

Well, we’ll see’t. Come, madam wife, sit by my side

And let the world slip. We shall ne’er be younger.

Bartholomew sits





1.1 Flourish. Enter Lucentio and his man, Tranio



LUCENTIO

Tranio, since for the great desire I had

To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,

I am arrived fore fruitful Lombardy,

The pleasant garden of great Italy,

And by my father’s love and leave am armed

With his good will and thy good company,

My trusty servant, well approved in all,

Here let us breathe, and haply institute

A course of learning and ingenious studies.

Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,

Gave me my being, and my father first—

A merchant of great traffic through the world,

Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii.

Vincentio’s son, brought up in Florence,

It shall become to serve all hopes conceived

To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.

And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,

Virtue and that part of philosophy

Will I apply that treats of happiness

By virtue specially to be achieved.

Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left

And am to Padua come as he that leaves

A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,

And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

TRANIO

Mi perdonate, gentle master mine.

I am in all affected as yourself,

Glad that you thus continue your resolve

To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.

Only, good master, while we do admire

This virtue and this moral discipline,

Let’s be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,

Or so devote to Aristotle’s checks

As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.

Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,

And practise rhetoric in your common talk.

Music and poesy use to quicken you;

The mathematics and the metaphysics,

Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.

No profit grows where is no pleasure ta’en.

In brief, sir, study what you most affect.

LUCENTIO

Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.

If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,

We could at once put us in readiness

And take a lodging fit to entertain

Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.

But stay a while, what company is this?

TRANIO

Master, some show to welcome us to town.

Enter Baptista with his two daughters, Katherine and Bianca; Gremio, a pantaloon; Hortensio, suitor to Bianca. Lucentio and Tranio stand by





BAPTISTA

Gentlemen, importune me no farther,

For how I firmly am resolved you know:

That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter

Before I have a husband for the elder.

If either of you both love Katherina,

Because I know you well and love you well

Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.

GREMIO

To cart her rather. She’s too rough for me.

There, there, Hortensio. Will you any wife?

KATHERINE (to Baptista)

I pray you, sir, is it your will

To make a stale of me amongst these mates?

HORTENSIO

‘Mates’, maid? How mean you that? No mates for

you

Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.

KATHERINE

I’faith, sir, you shall never need to fear.

Iwis it is not half-way to her heart,

But if it were, doubt not her care should be

To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool,

And paint your face, and use you like a fool.

HORTENSIO

From all such devils, good Lord deliver us.

GREMIO And me too, good Lord.

TRANIO (aside to Lucentio)

Husht, master, here’s some good pastime toward.

That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

LUCENTIO (aside to Tranio)

But in the other’s silence do I see

Maid’s mild behaviour and sobriety.

Peace, Tranio.

TRANIO (aside to Lucentio)

Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.

BAPTISTA

Gentlemen, that I may soon make good

What I have said—Bianca, get you in.

And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,

For I will love thee ne’er the less, my girl.

KATHERINE A pretty peat! It is best

Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

BIANCA

Sister, content you in my discontent.

(To Baptista) Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe.

My books and instruments shall be my company,

On them to look and practise by myself.

LUCENTIO (aside to Tranio)

Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak.

HORTENSIO

Signor Baptista, will you be so strange?

Sorry am I that our good will effects

Bianca’s grief.

GREMIO Why will you mew her up,

Signor Baptista, for this fiend of hell,

And make her bear the penance of her tongue?

BAPTIST

Gentlemen, content ye. I am resolved.

Go in, Bianca.

Exit Bianca

And for I know she taketh most delight

In music, instruments, and poetry,

Schoolmasters will I keep within my house

Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,

Or, Signor Gremio, you know any such,

Prefer them hither; for to cunning men

I will be very kind, and liberal

To mine own children in good bringing up.

And so farewell. Katherina, you may stay,

For I have more to commune with Bianca.

Exit

KATHERINE Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, shall I be appointed hours, as though belike I knew not what to take and what to leave? Ha!

Exit

GREMIO You may go to the devil’s dam. Your gifts are so good here’s none will hold you. Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out. Our cake’s dough on both sides. Farewell. Yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.

HORTENSIO So will I, Signor Gremio. But a word, I pray. Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both—that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in Bianca’s love—to labour and effect one thing specially.

GREMIO What’s that, I pray?

HORTENSIO Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

GREMIO A husband?—a devil!

HORTENSIO I say a husband.

GREMIO I say a devil. Think’st thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?

HORTENSIO Tush, Gremio. Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.

GREMIO I cannot tell, but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.

HORTENSIO Faith, as you say, there’s small choice in rotten apples. But come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping Baptista’s eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to’t afresh. Sweet Bianca Happy man be his dole. He that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signor Gremio?

GREMIO I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her. Come on.

Exeunt Hortensio and Gremio. Tranio and Lucentio remain

TRANIO

I pray, sir, tell me : is it possible

That love should of a sudden take such hold?

LUCENTIO

O Tranio, till I found it to be true

I never thought it possible or likely.

But see, while idly I stood looking on

I found the effect of love in idleness,

And now in plainness do confess to thee,

That art to me as secret and as dear

As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was,

Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,

If I achieve not this young modest girl.

Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst.

Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

TRANIO

Master, it is no time to chide you now.

Affection is not rated from the heart.

If love have touched you, naught remains but so—

Redime te captum quam queas minimo.

LUCENTIO

Gramercies, lad. Go forward, this contents.

The rest will comfort, for thy counsel’s sound.

TRANIO

Master, you looked so longly on the maid

Perhaps you marked not what’s the pith of all.

LUCENTIO

O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,

Such as the daughter of Agenor had,

That made great Jove to humble him to her hand

When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.

TRANIO

Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sister

Began to scold and raise up such a storm

That mortal ears might hardly endure the din ?

LUCENTIO

Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,

And with her breath she did perfume the air.

Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

TRANIO (aside)

Nay, then ’tis time to stir him from his trance.

(To Lucentio) I pray, awake, sir. If you love the maid,

Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it

stands:

Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd

That till the father rid his hands of her,

Master, your love must live a maid at home,

And therefore has he closely mewed her up

Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.

LUCENTIO

Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father’s he!

But art thou not advised he took some care

To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?

TRANIO

Ay, marry am I, sir, and now ’tis plotted.

LUCENTIO

I have it, Tranio.

TRANIO

Master, for my hand,

Both our inventions meet and jump in one.

LUCENTIO

Tell me thine first.

TRANIO You will be schoolmaster

And undertake the teaching of the maid.

That’s your device.

LUCENTIO

It is. May it be done?

TRANIO

Not possible; for who shall bear your part,

And be in Padua here Vincentio’s son,

Keep house, and ply his book, welcome his friends,

Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?

LUCENTIO

Basta, content thee, for I have it full.

We have not yet been seen in any house,

Nor can we be distinguished by our faces

For man or master. Then it follows thus:

Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead;

Keep house, and port, and servants, as I should.

I will some other be, some Florentine,

Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.

Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once

Uncase thee. Take my coloured hat and cloak.

When Biondello comes he waits on thee,

But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

TRANIO So had you need.

[They exchange clothes]





In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,

And I am tied to be obedient—

For so your father charged me at our parting,

‘Be serviceable to my son,’ quoth he,

Although I think ’twas in another sense—

I am content to be Lucentio

Because so well I love Lucentio.

LUCENTIO

Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,

And let me be a slave t’achieve that maid

Whose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.

Enter Biondello





Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?

BIONDELLO Where have I been? Nay, how now, where are you? Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes, or you stolen his, or both? Pray, what’s the news?

LUCENTIO

Sirrah, come hither. ‘Tis no time to jest,

And therefore frame your manners to the time.

Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life

Puts my apparel and my count’nance on,

And I for my escape have put on his,

For in a quarrel since I came ashore

I killed a man, and fear I was descried.

Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,

While I make way from hence to save my life.

You understand me?

BIONDELLO I sir? Ne’er a whit.

LUCENTIO

And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth.

Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

BIONDELLO

The better for him. Would I were so too.

TRANIO

So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after—

That Lucentio indeed had Baptista’s youngest

daughter.

But sirrah, not for my sake but your master’s I advise

You use your manners discreetly in all kind of

companies.

When I am alone, why then I am Tranio,

But in all places else your master, Lucentio.

LUCENTIO Tranio, let’s go.

One thing more rests that thyself execute—

To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me

why,

Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.

Exeunt

The presenters above speak





FIRST SERVINGMAN

My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.

SLY Yes, by Saint Anne do I. A good matter, surely. Comes there any more of it?

BARTHOLOMEW My lord, ’tis but begun.

SLY ‘Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. Would ’twere done.

They sit and mark





1.2 Enter Petruccio and his man, Grumio



PETRUCCIO

Verona, for a while I take my leave

To see my friends in Padua; but of all

My best-beloved and approved friend

Hortensio, and I trow this is his house.

Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.

GRUMIO Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your worship?

PETRUCCIO Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.

GRUMIO Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?

PETRUCCIO

Villain, I say, knock me at this gate,

And rap me well or I’ll knock your knave’s pate.

GRUMIO

My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you

first,

And then I know after who comes by the worst.

PETRUCCIO Will it not be?

Faith, sirrah, an you’ll not knock, I’ll ring it.

I’ll try how you can sol-fa and sing it.

He wrings him by the ears. [Grumio kneels]





GRUMIO Help, masters, help! My master is mad.

PETRUCCIO Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain.

Enter Hortensio





HORTENSIO How now, what’s the matter? My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruccio ? How do you all at Verona?

PETRUCCIO

Signor Hortensio, come you to part the fray?

Con tutto il cuore ben trovato, may I say.

HORTENSIO Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto onorato signor mio Petruccio. Rise, Grumio, rise. We will compound this quarrel.

Grumio rises





GRUMIO Nay, ‘tis no matter, sir, what he ’leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service-look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had well knocked at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.

PETRUCCIO

A senseless villain. Good Hortensio,

I bade the rascal knock upon your gate,

And could not get him for my heart to do it.

GRUMIO Knock at the gate? O heavens, spake you not these words plain? ‘Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly’ ? And come you now with knocking at the gate?

PETRUCCIO

Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.

HORTENSIO

Petruccio, patience. I am Grumio’s pledge.

Why this’ a heavy chance ’twixt him and you,

Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.

And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale

Blows you to Padua here from old Verona ?

PETRUCCIO

Such wind as scatters young men through the world

To seek their fortunes farther than at home,

Where small experience grows. But in a few,

Signor Hortensio, thus it stands with me :

Antonio, my father, is deceased,

And I have thrust myself into this maze

Happily to wive and thrive as best I may.

Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home,

And so am come abroad to see the world.

HORTENSIO

Petruccio, shall I then come roundly to thee

And wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favoured wife?

Thou‘dst thank me but a little for my counsel,

And yet I’ll promise thee she shall be rich,

And very rich. But thou’rt too much my friend,

And I’ll not wish thee to her.

PETRUCCIO

Signor Hortensio, ’twixt such friends as we

Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know

One rich enough to be Petruccio’s wife—

As wealth is burden of my wooing dance—

Be she as foul as was Florentius’ love,

As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd

As Socrates’ Xanthippe or a worse,

She moves me not—or not removes at least

Affection’s edge in me, were she as rough

As are the swelling Adriatic seas.

I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;

If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

GRUMIO (to Hortensio) Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is. Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne’er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses. Why, nothing comes amiss so money comes withal.

HORTENSIO

Petruccio, since we are stepped thus far in,

I will continue that I broached in jest.

I can, Petruccio, help thee to a wife

With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,

Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.

Her only fault—and that is faults enough—

Is that she is intolerable curst,

And shrewd and froward so beyond all measure

That, were my state far worser than it is,

I would not wed her for a mine of gold.

PETRUCCIO

Hortensio, peace. Thou know‘st not gold’s effect.

Tell me her father’s name and ’tis enough,

For I will board her though she chide as loud

As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.

HORTENSIO

Her father is Baptista Minola,

An affable and courteous gentleman.

Her name is Katherina Minola,

Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.

PETRUCCIO

I know her father, though I know not her,

And he knew my deceased father well.

I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,

And therefore let me be thus bold with you

To give you over at this first encounter,

Unless you will accompany me thither.

GRUMIO I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. O’ my word, an she knew him as well as I do she would think scolding would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so. Why, that’s nothing; an he begin once he’ll rail in his rope-tricks. I’ll tell you what, sir, an she stand him but a little he will throw a figure in her face and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.

HORTENSIO

Tarry, Petruccio, I must go with thee,

For in Baptista’s keep my treasure is.

He hath the jewel of my life in hold,

His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,

And her withholds from me and other more,

Suitors to her and rivals in my love,

Supposing it a thing impossible,

For those defects I have before rehearsed,

That ever Katherina will be wooed.

Therefore this order hath Baptista ta’en:

That none shall have access unto Bianca

Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.

GRUMIO Katherine the curst—

A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

HORTENSIO

Now shall my friend Petruccio do me grace,

And offer me disguised in sober robes

To old Baptista as a schoolmaster

Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,

That so I may by this device at least

Have leave and leisure to make love to her,

And unsuspected court her by herself.

Enter Gremio with a paper, and Lucentio disguised as a schoolmaster





GRUMIO Here’s no knavery. See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together. Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?

HORTENSIO

Peace, Grumio, it is the rival of my love.

Petruccio, stand by a while.

GRUMIO

A proper stripling, and an amorous!

Petruccio, Hortensio, and Grumio stand aside





GREMIO (to Lucentio)

O, very well—I have perused the note.

Hark you, sir, I’ll have them very fairly bound—

All books of love, see that at any hand—

And see you read no other lectures to her.

You understand me. Over and beside

Signor Baptista’s liberality,

I’ll mend it with a largess. Take your paper, too,

And let me have them very well perfumed,

For she is sweeter than perfume itself

To whom they go to. What will you read to her?

LUCENTIO

Whate’er I read to her, I’ll plead for you

As for my patron, stand you so assured,

As firmly as yourself were still in place—

Yea, and perhaps with more successful words

Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.

GREMIO

O this learning, what a thing it is!

GRUMIO (aside)

O this woodcock, what an ass it is!

PETRUCCIO Peace, sirrah.

HORTENSIO

Grumio, mum. (Coming forward) God save you, Signor Gremio.

GREMIO

And you are well met, Signor Hortensio.

Trow you whither I am going?

To Baptista Minola.

I promised to enquire carefully

About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,

And by good fortune I have lighted well

On this young man, for learning and behaviour

Fit for her turn, well read in poetry

And other books—good ones, I warrant ye.

HORTENSIO

‘Tis well, and I have met a gentleman

Hath promised me to help me to another,

A fine musician, to instruct our mistress.

So shall I no whit be behind in duty

To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

GREMIO

Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.

GRUMIO (aside) And that his bags shall prove.

HORTENSIO

Gremio, ’tis now no time to vent our love.

Listen to me, and if you speak me fair

I’ll tell you news indifferent good for either.

Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,

Upon agreement from us to his liking

Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,

Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

GREMIO So said, so done, is well.

Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

PETRUCCIO

I know she is an irksome brawling scold.

If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.

GREMIO

No, sayst me so, friend? What countryman?

PETRUCCIO

Born in Verona, old Antonio’s son.

My father dead, his fortune lives for me,

And I do hope good days and long to see.

GREMIO O sir, such a life with such a wife were strange.

But if you have a stomach, to’t, a’ God’s name.

You shall have me assisting you in all.

But will you woo this wildcat?

PETRUCCIO Will I live!

GRUMIO

Will he woo her? Ay, or I’ll hang her.

PETRUCCIO

Why came I hither but to that intent?

Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?

Have I not in my time heard lions roar?

Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,

Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?

Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,

And heaven’s artillery thunder in the skies?

Have I not in a pitched battle heard

Loud ’larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets’ clang?

And do you tell me of a woman’s tongue,

That gives not half so great a blow to hear

As will a chestnut in a farmer’s fire ?

Tush, tush—fear boys with bugs.

GRUMIO For he fears none.

GREMIO Hortensio, hark.

This gentleman is happily arrived,

My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.

HORTENSIO

I promised we would be contributors,

And bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe’er.

GREMIO

And so we will, provided that he win her.

GRUMIO

I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

Enter Tranio, brave, as Lucentio, and Biondello





TRANIO Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold, tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way to the house of Signor Baptista Minola?

BIONDELLO He that has the two fair daughters—is’t he you mean?

TRANIO Even he, Biondello.

GREMIO

Hark you, sir, you mean not her to—

TRANIO

Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?

PETRUCCIO

Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.

TRANIO

I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let’s away.

LUCENTIO (aside)

Well begun, Tranio.

HORTENSIO Sir, a word ere you go.

Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of—yea or no?

TRANIO

And if I be, sir, is it any offence?

GREMIO

No, if without more words you will get you hence.

TRANIO

Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free

For me as for you?

GREMIO But so is not she.

TRANIO

For what reason, I beseech you?

GREMIO

For this reason, if you’ll know—

That she’s the choice love of Signor Gremio.

HORTENSIO

That she’s the chosen of Signor Hortensio.

TRANIO

Softly, my masters. If you be gentlemen,

Do me this right, hear me with patience.

Baptista is a noble gentleman

To whom my father is not all unknown,

And were his daughter fairer than she is

She may more suitors have, and me for one.

Fair Leda’s daughter had a thousand wooers;

Then well one more may fair Bianca have,

And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one,

Though Paris came, in hope to speed alone.

GREMIO

What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!

LUCENTIO

Sir, give him head, I know he’ll prove a jade.

PETRUCCIO

Hortensio, to what end are all these words?

HORTENSIO

Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,

Did you yet ever see Baptista’s daughter?

TRANIO

No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two,

The one as famous for a scolding tongue

As is the other for beauteous modesty.

PETRUCCIO

Sir, sir, the first’s for me. Let her go by.

GREMIO

Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,

And let it be more than Alcides’ twelve.

PETRUCCIO

Sir, understand you this of me in sooth,

The youngest daughter whom you hearken for

Her father keeps from all access of suitors,

And will not promise her to any man

Until the elder sister first be wed.

The younger then is free, and not before.

TRANIO

If it be so, sir, that you are the man

Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest,

And if you break the ice and do this feat,

Achieve the elder, set the younger free

For our access, whose hap shall be to have her

Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.

HORTENSIO

Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive;

And since you do profess to be a suitor

You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,

To whom we all rest generally beholden.

TRANIO

Sir, I shall not be slack. In sign whereof,

Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,

And quaff carouses to our mistress’ health,

And do as adversaries do in law—

Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.

GRUMIO and BIONDELLO

O excellent motion! Fellows, let’s be gone.

HORTENSIO

The motion’s good indeed, and be it so.

Petruccio, I shall be your ben venuto.

Exeunt





2.1 Enter Katherina and Bianca, her hands bound



BIANCA

Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself

To make a bondmaid and a slave of me.

That I disdain, but for these other goods,

Unbind my hands, I’ll pull them off myself,

Yea, all my raiment to my petticoat,

Or what you will command me will I do,

So well I know my duty to my elders.

KATHERINE

Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell

Whom thou lov’st best. See thou dissemble not.

BIANCA

Believe me, sister, of all the men alive

I never yet beheld that special face

Which I could fancy more than any other.

KATHERINE

Minion, thou liest. Is’t not Hortensio?

BIANCA

If you affect him, sister, here I swear

I’ll plead for you myself but you shall have him.

KATHERINE

O then, belike you fancy riches more.

You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

BIANCA

Is it for him you do envy me so?

Nay, then, you jest, and now I well perceive

You have but jested with me all this while.

I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.

KATHERINE (strikes her)

If that be jest, then all the rest was so.

Enter Baptista





BAPTISTA

Why, how now, dame, whence grows this insolence?

Bianca, stand aside.—Poor girl, she weeps.—

Go ply thy needle, meddle not with her.

(To Katherine) For shame, thou hilding of a devilish

spirit,

Why dost thou wrong her that did ne’er wrong thee?

When did she cross thee with a bitter word?

KATHERINE

Her silence flouts me, and I’ll be revenged.

She flies after Bianca





BAPTISTA

What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.

Exit Bianca

KATHERINE

What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see

She is your treasure, she must have a husband.

I must dance barefoot on her wedding day,

And for your love to her lead apes in hell.

Talk not to me. I will go sit and weep

Till I can find occasion of revenge.

Exit

BAPTISTA

Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?

But who comes here?

Enter Gremio, Lucentio as a schoolmaster in the

habit of a mean man, Petruccio with Hortensio as a

musician, Tranio as Lucentio, with Biondello his

boy bearing a lute and books





GREMIO Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.

BAPTISTA Good morrow, neighbour Gremio. God save you, gentlemen.

PETRUCCIO

And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughter

Called Katherina, fair and virtuous?

BAPTISTA

I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.

GREMIO

You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.

PETRUCCIO

You wrong me, Signor Gremio. Give me leave.

(To Baptista) I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,

That hearing of her beauty and her wit,

Her affability and bashful modesty,

Her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour,

Am bold to show myself a forward guest

Within your house to make mine eye the witness

Of that report which I so oft have heard,

And for an entrance to my entertainment

I do present you with a man of mine (presenting

Hortensio)

Cunning in music and the mathematics

To instruct her fully in those sciences,

Whereof I know she is not ignorant.

Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.

His name is Licio, born in Mantua.

BAPTISTA

You’re welcome, sir, and he for your good sake.

But for my daughter, Katherine, this I know:

She is not for your turn, the more my grief.

PETRUCCIO

I see you do not mean to part with her,

Or else you like not of my company.

BAPTISTA

Mistake me not, I speak but as I find.

Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?

PETRUCCIO

Petruccio is my name, Antonio’s son,

A man well known throughout all Italy.

BAPTISTA

I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.

GREMIO

Saving your tale, Petruccio, I pray

Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.

Baccare, you are marvellous forward.

PETRUCCIO

O pardon me, Signor Gremio, I would fain be doing.

GREMIO

I doubt it not, sir. But you will curse your wooing. (To Baptista) Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholden to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar (presenting Lucentio) that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept his service.

BAPTISTA A thousand thanks, Signor Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio. (To Tranio) But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?

TRANIO

Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own

That, being a stranger in this city here,

Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,

Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.

Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me

In the preferment of the eldest sister.

This liberty is all that I request:

That upon knowledge of my parentage

I may have welcome ‘mongst the rest that woo,

And free access and favour as the rest.

And toward the education of your daughters

I here bestow a simple instrument,

And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.

If you accept them, then their worth is great.

BAPTISTA

Lucentio is your name—of whence, I pray?

TRANIO

Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.

BAPTISTA

A mighty man of Pisa. By report

I know him well. You are very welcome, sir.

(To Hortensio) Take you the lute, (to Lucentio) and you

the set of books.

You shall go see your pupils presently.

Holla, within!

Enter a Servant





Sirrah, lead these gentlemen





To my daughters, and tell them both

These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.

Exit Servant with Lucentio and Hortensio,

[Biondello following]

(To Petruccio) We will go walk a little in the orchard,

And then to dinner. You are passing welcome—

And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

PETRUCCIO

Signor Baptista, my business asketh haste,

And every day I cannot come to woo.

You knew my father well, and in him me,

Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,

Which I have bettered rather than decreased.

Then tell me, if I get your daughter’s love,

What dowry shall I have with her to wife?

BAPTISTA

After my death the one half of my lands,

And in possession twenty thousand crowns.

PETRUCCIO

And for that dowry I’ll assure her of

Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,

In all my lands and leases whatsoever.

Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,

That covenants may be kept on either hand.

BAPTISTA

Ay, when the special thing is well obtained—

That is her love, for that is all in all.

PETRUCCIO

Why, that is nothing, for I tell you, father,

I am as peremptory as she proud-minded,

And where two raging fires meet together

They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.

Though little fire grows great with little wind,

Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.

So I to her, and so she yields to me,

For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.

BAPTISTA

Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed.

But be thou armed for some unhappy words.

PETRUCCIO

Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,

That shakes not though they blow perpetually.

Enter Hortensio with his head broke





BAPTISTA

How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?

HORTENSIO

For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

BAPTISTA

What, will my daughter prove a good musician?

HORTENSIO

I think she’ll sooner prove a soldier.

Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.

BAPTISTA

Why then, thou canst not break her to the lute?

HORTENSIO

Why no, for she hath broke the lute to me.

I did but tell her she mistook her frets,

And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,

When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,

‘Frets, call you these?’ quoth she, ‘I’ll fume with

them,’

And with that word she struck me on the head,

And through the instrument my pate made way,

And there I stood amazed for a while,

As on a pillory, looking through the lute,

While she did call me rascal, fiddler,

And twangling jack, with twenty such vile terms,

As had she studied to misuse me so.

PETRUCCIO

Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench!

I love her ten times more than e’er I did.

O, how I long to have some chat with her!

BAPTISTA (to Hortensio)

Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited.

Proceed in practice with my younger daughter.

She’s apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.

Signor Petruccio, will you go with us,

Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you ?

PETRUCCIO

I pray you, do.

Exeunt all but Petruccio

I’ll attend her here,





And woo her with some spirit when she comes.

Say that she rail, why then I’ll tell her plain

She sings as sweetly as a nightingale.

Say that she frown, I’ll say she looks as clear

As morning roses newly washed with dew.

Say she be mute and will not speak a word,

Then I’ll commend her volubility,

And say she uttereth piercing eloquence.

If she do bid me pack, I’ll give her thanks

As though she bid me stay by her a week.

If she deny to wed, I’ll crave the day

When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.

But here she comes, and now, Petruccio, speak.

Enter Katherina





Good morrow, Kate, for that’s your name, I hear.

KATHERINE

Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.

They call me Katherine that do talk of me.

PETRUCCIO

You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate,

And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst,

But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,

Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate—

For dainties are all cates, and therefore ‘Kate’—

Take this of me, Kate of my consolation:

Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,

Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded—

Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs—

Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.

KATHERINE

Moved? In good time. Let him that moved you hither

Re-move you hence. I knew you at the first

You were a movable.

PETRUCCIO

Why, what’s a movable?

KATHERINE

A joint-stool.

PETRUCCIO

Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.

KATHERINE

Asses are made to bear, and so are you.

PETRUCCIO

Women are made to bear, and so are you.

KATHERINE

No such jade as you, if me you mean.

PETRUCCIO

Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee,

For knowing thee to be but young and light.

KATHERINE

Too light for such a swain as you to catch,

And yet as heavy as my weight should be. 205

PETRUCCIO

Should be?—should buzz.

KATHERINE Well ta’en, and like a buzzard.

PETRUCCIO

O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?

KATHERINE

Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.

PETRUCCIO

Come, come, you wasp, i’faith you are too angry.

KATHERINE

If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

PETRUCCIO

My remedy is then to pluck it out.

KATHERINE

Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.

PETRUCCIO

Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting? In his tail.

KATHERINE In his tongue.

PETRUCCIO Whose tongue?

KATHERINE

Yours, if you talk of tales, and so farewell.

PETRUCCIO

What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again, Good Kate, I am a gentleman.

KATHERINE That I’ll try.

She strikes him





PETRUCCIO

I swear I’ll cuff you if you strike again.

KATHERINE So may you lose your arms.

If you strike me you are no gentleman,

And if no gentleman, why then, no arms.

PETRUCCIO

A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books.

KATHERINE What is your crest—a coxcomb?

PETRUCCIO

A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.

KATHERINE

No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.

PETRUCCIO

Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.

KATHERINE

It is my fashion when I see a crab.

PETRUCCIO

Why, here’s no crab, and therefore look not sour.

KATHERINE There is, there is.

PETRUCCIO Then show it me. 230

KATHERINE

Had I a glass I would.

PETRUCCIO

What, you mean my face?

KATHERINE

Well aimed, of such a young one.

PETRUCCIO

Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.

KATHERINE

Yet you are withered.

PETRUCCIO ‘Tis with cares.

KATHERINE

I care not.

PETRUCCIO

Nay, hear you, Kate. In sooth, you scape not so. 235

KATHERINE

I chafe you if I tarry. Let me go.

PETRUCCIO

No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle.

‘Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,

And now I find report a very liar,

For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,

But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.

Thou canst not frown. Thou canst not look askance,

Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,

Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,

But thou with mildness entertain’st thy wooers,

With gentle conference, soft, and affable.

Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?

O sland’rous world ! Kate like the hazel twig

Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue

As hazelnuts, and sweeter than the kernels.

O let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.

KATHERINE

Go, fool, and whom thou keep’st command.

PETRUCCIO

Did ever Dian so become a grove

As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?

O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,

And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.

KATHERINE

Where did you study all this goodly speech?

PETRUCCIO

It is extempore, from my mother-wit.

KATHERINE

A witty mother, witless else her son.

PETRUCCIO

Am I not wise?

KATHERINE Yes, keep you warm.

PETRUCCIO

Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.

And therefore setting all this chat aside,

Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented

That you shall be my wife, your dowry ’greed on,

And will you, nill you, I will marry you.

Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,

For by this light, whereby I see thy beauty—

Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well—

Thou must be married to no man but me,

Enter Baptista, Gremio, and Tranio as Lucentio





For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,

And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate

Conformable as other household Kates.

Here comes your father. Never make denial.

I must and will have Katherine to my wife.

BAPTISTA Now, Signor Petruccio, how speed you with my daughter? 276

PETRUCCIO How but well, sir, how but well?

It were impossible I should speed amiss.

BAPTISTA

Why, how now, daughter Katherine—in your dumps?

KATHERINE

Call you me daughter? Now I promise you 280

You have showed a tender fatherly regard,

To wish me wed to one half-lunatic,

A madcap ruffian and a swearing Jack,

That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.

PETRUCCIO

Father, ‘tis thus: yourself and all the world 285

That talked of her have talked amiss of her.

If she be curst, it is for policy,

For she’s not froward, but modest as the dove.

She is not hot, but temperate as the morn.

For patience she will prove a second Grissel, 290

And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.

And to conclude, we have ’greed so well together

That upon Sunday is the wedding day.

KATHERINE

I’ll see thee hanged on Sunday first.

GREMIO Hark, Petruccio, she says she’ll see thee hanged first. 296

TRANIO

Is this your speeding ? Nay then, goodnight our part.

PETRUCCIO

Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself.

If she and I be pleased, what’s that to you?

Tis bargained ‘twixt us twain, being alone,

That she shall still be curst in company.

I tell you, ’tis incredible to believe

How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate I

She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss

She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,

That in a twink she won me to her love.

O, you are novices. ‘Tis a world to see

How tame, when men and women are alone,

A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.

Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice,

To buy apparel ’gainst the wedding day.

Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests.

I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.

BAPTISTA

I know not what to say, but give me your hands.

God send you joy, Petruccio! ’Tis a match.

GREMIO and TRANIO

Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.

PETRUCCIO

Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.

I will to Venice. Sunday comes apace.

We will have rings, and things, and fine array;

And kiss me, Kate. We will be married o’ Sunday.

Exeunt Petruccio and Katherine, severally





GREMIO

Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?

BAPTISTA

Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant’s part,

And venture madly on a desperate mart.

TRANIO

‘Twas a commodity lay fretting by you.

’Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

BAPTISTA

The gain I seek is quiet in the match.

GREMIO

No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.

But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter.

Now is the day we long have looked for.

I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

TRANIO

And I am one that love Bianca more

Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

GREMIO

Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.

TRANIO

Greybeard, thy love doth freeze.

GREMIO But thine doth fry.

Skipper, stand back. ’Tis age that nourisheth.

TRANIO

But youth in ladies’ eyes that flourisheth.

BAPTISTA A

Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife.

’Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both

That can assure my daughter greatest dower

Shall have my Bianca’s love.

Say, Signor Gremio, what can you assure her?

GREMIO

First, as you know, my house within the city

Is richly furnished with plate and gold,

Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;

My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry.

In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns,

In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,

Costly apparel, tents and canopies,

Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,

Valance of Venice gold in needlework, 350

Pewter, and brass, and all things that belongs

To house or housekeeping. Then at my farm

I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,

Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,

And all things answerable to this portion. 355

Myself am struck in years, I must confess,

And if I die tomorrow this is hers,

If whilst I live she will be only mine.

TRANIO

That ‘only’ came well in. Sir, list to me.

I am my father’s heir and only son.

If I may have your daughter to my wife

I’ll leave her houses three or four as good,

Within rich Pisa walls, as any one

Old Signor Gremio has in Padua,

Besides two thousand ducats by the year

Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.

What, have I pinched you, Signor Gremio?

GREMIO

Two thousand ducats by the year of land—

My land amounts not to so much in all.

That she shall have; besides, an argosy

That now is lying in Marseilles road.

What, have I choked you with an argosy?

TRANIO

Gremio, ‘tis known my father hath no less

Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses

And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her,

And twice as much whate’er thou off’rest next.

GREMIO

Nay, I have offered all. I have no more,

And she can have no more than all I have.

If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

TRANIO

Why then, the maid is mine from all the world.

By your firm promise Gremio is out-vied.

BAPTISTA

I must confess your offer is the best,

And let your father make her the assurance,

She is your own. Else, you must pardon me,

If you should die before him, where’s her dower?

TRANIO

That’s but a cavil. He is old, I young.

GREMIO

And may not young men die as well as old ?

BAPTISTA Well, gentlemen,

I am thus resolved. On Sunday next, you know,

My daughter Katherine is to be married.

(To Tranio) Now, on the Sunday following shall

Bianca

Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;

If not, to Signor Gremio.

And so I take my leave, and thank you both.

GREMIO

Adieu, good neighbour.

Exit Baptista





Now I fear thee not.





Sirrah, young gamester, your father were a fool

To give thee all, and in his waning age

Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy ! I

An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

Exit

TRANIO

A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!

Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.

‘Tis in my head to do my master good.

I see no reason but supposed Lucentio

Must get a father called supposed Vincentio—

And that’s a wonder; fathers commonly

Do get their children, but in this case of wooing

A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.

Exit





3.1 Enter Lucentio with books, as Cambio, Hortensio with a lute, as Licio, and Bianca



LUCENTIO

Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir.

Have you so soon forgot the entertainment

Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?

HORTENSIO

But, wrangling pedant, this Bianca is,

The patroness of heavenly harmony.

Then give me leave to have prerogative,

And when in music we have spent an hour

Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.

LUCENTIO

Preposterous ass, that never read so far

To know the cause why music was ordained!

Was it not to refresh the mind of man

After his studies or his usual pain?

Then give me leave to read philosophy,

And while I pause, serve in your harmony.

HORTENSIO

Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.

BIANCA

Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong

To strive for that which resteth in my choice.

I am no breeching scholar in the schools.

I’ll not be tied to hours nor ‘pointed times,

But learn my lessons as I please myself;

And to cut off all strife, here sit we down.

(To Hortensio) Take you your instrument, play you the

whiles.

His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.

HORTENSIO

You’ll leave his lecture when I am in tune?

LUCENTIO

That will be never. Tune your instrument.

Hortensio tunes his lute. Lucentio opens a book





BIANCA Where left we last?

LUCENTIO Here, madam.

(Reads) ‘Hie ibat Simois, hie est Sigeia tellus, Hie steterat Priami regia celsa senis.’





BIANCA Construe them.

LUCENTIO ‘Hie ibat’, as I told you before—‘Simois’, I am Lucentio—‘hic est’, son unto Vincentio of Pisa-‘Sigeia tellus’, disguised thus to get your love—‘hic steterat’, and that Lucentio that comes a-wooing—‘Priami’, is my man Tranio—‘regia’, bearing my port—‘celsa senis’, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.

HORTENSIO Madam, my instrument’s in tune.

BIANCA Let’s hear. (Hortensio plays) O fie, the treble jars.

LUCENTIO Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.

Hortensio tunes his lute again





BIANCA Now let me see if I can construe it. ‘Hic ibat Simois’, I know you not—‘hic est Sigeia tellus’, I trust you not—‘hic steterat Priami’, take heed he hear us not—‘regia’, presume not—‘celsa senis’, despair not.

HORTENSIO

Madam, ’tis now in tune.

LUCENTIO All but the bass.

HORTENSIO

The bass is right, ’tis the base knave that jars.

(Aside) How fiery and forward our pedant is!

Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.

Pedascule, I’ll watch you better yet.

BIANCA (to Lucentio)

In time I may believe; yet, I mistrust.

LUCENTIO

Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides

Was Ajax, called so from his grandfather.

BIANCA

I must believe my master, else, I promise you,

I should be arguing still upon that doubt.

But let it rest. Now Licio, to you.

Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,

That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

HORTENSIO (to Lucentio)

You may go walk and give me leave awhile.

My lessons make no music in three parts.

LUCENTIO

Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait.

(Aside) And watch withal, for but I be deceived

Our fine musician groweth amorous.

HORTENSIO

Madam, before you touch the instrument

To learn the order of my fingering,

I must begin with rudiments of art,

To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,

More pleasant, pithy, and effectual

Than hath been taught by any of my trade;

And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.

He gives a paper





BIANCA

Why, I am past my gamut long ago.

HORTENSIO

Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.

BIANCA (reads)

‘Gam-ut I am, the ground of all accord, A—re—to plead Hortensio’s passion.



B—mi—Bianca, take him for thy lord, C—fa, ut—that loves with all affection.



D—so), re—one clef, two notes have I,



E—la, mi—show pity, or I die.’





Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not.

Old fashions please me best. I am not so nice

To change true rules for odd inventions.

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER

Mistress, your father prays you leave your books

And help to dress your sister’s chamber up.

You know tomorrow is the wedding day.

BIANCA

Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.

LUCENTIO

Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

Exeunt Bianca, Messenger, and Lucentio





HORTENSIO

But I have cause to pry into this pedant.

Methinks he looks as though he were in love.

Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble

To cast thy wand’ring eyes on every stale,

Seize thee that list. If once I find thee ranging,

Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.

Exit





3.2 Enter Baptista, Gremio, Tranio as Lucentio, Katherine, Bianca, and others, attendants



BAPTISTA (to Tranio)

Signor Lucentio, this is the ‘pointed day

That Katherine and Petruccio should be married,

And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.

What will be said, what mockery will it be,

To want the bridegroom when the priest attends

To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage?

What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?

KATHERINE

No shame but mine. I must forsooth be forced

To give my hand opposed against my heart

Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen, 10

Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure.

I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,

Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour,

And to be noted for a merry man

He’ll woo a thousand, ‘point the day of marriage,

Make friends, invite them, and proclaim the banns,

Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.

Now must the world point at poor Katherine

And say ‘Lo, there is mad Petruccio’s wife,

If it would please him come and marry her.’

TRANIO

Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista, too.

Upon my life, Petruccio means but well.

Whatever fortune stays him from his word,

Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;

Though he be merry, yet withal he’s honest.

KATHERINE

Would Katherine had never seen him, though.

Exit weeping

BAPTISTA

Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep.

For such an injury would vex a very saint,

Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

Enter Biondello





BIONDELLO Master, master, news—old news, and such news as you never heard of. 31

BAPTISTA Is it new and old too? How may that be?

BIONDELLO Why, is it not news to hear of Petruccio’s coming?

BAPTISTA Is he come? 35

BIONDELLO Why, no, sir.

BAPTISTA What then?

BIONDELLO He is coming.

BAPTISTA When will he be here?

BIONDELLO When he stands where I am and sees you there. 41

TRANIO But say, what to thine old news?

BIONDELLO Why, Petruccio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice-turned, a pair of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another laced, an old rusty sword ta’en out of the town armoury with a broken hilt, and chapeless, with two broken points, his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred, besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, weighed in the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legged before and with a half-cheeked bit and a headstall of sheep’s leather which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often burst and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a woman’s crupper of velour which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.

BAPTISTA Who comes with him?

BIONDELLO O sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse, with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat, and the humour of forty fancies pricked in’t for a feather—a monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentleman’s lackey.

TRANIO

’Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;

Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparelled.

BAPTISTA

I am glad he’s come, howsoe’er he comes.

BIONDELLO Why, sir, he comes not.

BAPTISTA Didst thou not say he comes?

BIONDELLO Who? That Petruccio came? 75

BAPTISTA Ay, that Petruccio came.

BIONDELLO No, sir. I say his horse comes with him on his back.

BAPTISTA

Why, that’s all one.

BIONDELLO

Nay, by Saint Jamy, I hold you a penny,

A horse and a man

Is more than one,

And yet not many.





Enter Petruccio and Grumio, fantastically dressed





PETRUCCIO Come, where be these gallants? Who’s at home?

BAPTISTA You are welcome, sir.

PETRUCCIO And yet I come not well.

BAPTISTA And yet you halt not.

TRANIO

Not so well apparelled as I wish you were.

PETRUCCIO

Were it not better I should rush in thus—

But where is Kate? Where is my lovely bride?

How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown.

And wherefore gaze this goodly company

As if they saw some wondrous monument,

Some comet or unusual prodigy?

BAPTISTA

Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day.

First were we sad, fearing you would not come;

Now sadder that you come so unprovided.

Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,

An eyesore to our solemn festival.

TRANIO

And tell us what occasion of import

Hath all so long detained you from your wife

And sent you hither so unlike yourself?

PETRUCCIO

Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear.

Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,

Though in some part enforced to digress,

Which at more leisure I will so excuse

As you shall well be satisfied withal.

But where is Kate? I stay too long from her.

The morning wears, ’tis time we were at church.

TRANIO

See not your bride in these unreverent robes.

Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.

PETRUCCIO

Not I, believe me. Thus I’ll visit her.

BAPTISTA

But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.

PETRUCCIO

Good sooth, even thus. Therefore ha’ done with

words.

To me she’s married, not unto my clothes.

Could I repair what she will wear in me

As I can change these poor accoutrements,

’Twere well for Kate and better for myself.

But what a fool am I to chat with you

When I should bid good morrow to my bride,

And seal the title with a lovely kiss!

Exit With Grumiol

TRANIO

He hath some meaning in his mad attire.

We will persuade him, be it possible,

To put on better ere he go to church.

[Exit with Gremio]

BAPTISTA

I’ll after him, and see the event of this.

[Exeunt]





3.3 [Enter Lucentio as Cambio, and Tranio as Lucentio]



TRANIO

But, sir, to love concerneth us to add

Her father’s liking, which to bring to pass,

As I before imparted to your worship,

I am to get a man—whate’er he be

It skills not much, we’ll fit him to our turn—

And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,

And make assurance here in Padua

Of greater sums than I have promised.

So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,

And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

LUCENTIO

Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster

Doth watch Bianca’s steps so narrowly,

‘Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,

Which once performed, let all the world say no,

I’ll keep mine own, despite of all the world.

TRANIO

That by degrees we mean to look into,

And watch our vantage in this business.

We’ll overreach the greybeard Gremio,

The narrow-prying father Minola,

The quaint musician, amorous Licio,

All for my master’s sake, Lucentio.

Enter Gremio





Signor Gremio, came you from the church?

GREMIO

As willingly as e’er I came from school.

TRANIO

And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?

GREMIO

A bridegroom, say you? ’Tis a groom indeed—

A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

TRANIO

Curster than she? Why, ’tis impossible.

GREMIO

Why, he’s a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

TRANIO

Why, she’s a devil, a devil, the devil’s dam.

GREMIO

Tut, she’s a lamb, a dove, a fool to him.

I’ll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest

Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,

‘Ay, by Gog’s woun’s,’ quoth he, and swore so loud

That all amazed the priest let fall the book,

And as he stooped again to take it up

This mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff

That down fell priest, and book, and book, and priest.

‘Now take them up,’ quoth he, ‘if any list.’

TRANIO

What said the vicar when he rose again?

GREMIO

Trembled and shook, forwhy he stamped and swore

As if the vicar meant to cozen him.

But after many ceremonies done

He calls for wine. ‘A health,’ quoth he, as if

He had been aboard, carousing to his mates

After a storm; quaffed off the muscatel

And threw the sops all in the sexton’s face,

Having no other reason

But that his beard grew thin and hungerly

And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.

This done, he took the bride about the neck

And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack

That at the parting all the church did echo,

And I seeing this came thence for very shame,

And after me, I know, the rout is coming.

Such a mad marriage never was before.

Music plays

Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.

Enter Petruccio, Katherine, Bianca, Hortensio as

Licio, Baptista, Grumio, and others, attendants





PETRUCCIO

Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains.

I know you think to dine with me today,

And have prepared great store of wedding cheer.

But so it is my haste doth call me hence,

And therefore here I mean to take my leave.

BAPTISTA

Is’t possible you will away tonight?

PETRUCCIO

I must away today, before night come.

Make it no wonder. If you knew my business,

You would entreat me rather go than stay.

And, honest company, I thank you all

That have beheld me give away myself

To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.

Dine with my father, drink a health to me,

For I must hence; and farewell to you all.

TRANIO

Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

PETRUCCIO

It may not be.

GREMIO Let me entreat you.

PETRUCCIO

It cannot be.

KATHERINE Let me entreat you.

PETRUCCIO

I am content.

KATHERINE Are you content to stay?

PETRUCCIO

I am content you shall entreat me stay,

But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

KATHERINE

Now, if you love me, stay.

PETRUCCIO Grumio, my horse.

GRUMIO Ay, sir, they be ready. The oats have eaten the horses.

KATHERINE

Nay, then, do what thou canst, I will not go today,

No, nor tomorrow—not till I please myself.

The door is open, sir, there lies your way.

You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.

For me, I’ll not be gone till I please myself.

’Tis like you’ll prove a jolly, surly groom,

That take it on you at the first so roundly.

PETRUCCIO

O Kate, content thee. Prithee, be not angry.

KATHERINE

I will be angry. What hast thou to do?

Father, be quiet. He shall stay my leisure.

GREMIO

Ay, marry, sir. Now it begins to work.

KATHERINE

Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.

I see a woman may be made a fool

If she had not a spirit to resist.

PETRUCCIO

They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.

Obey the bride, you that attend on her.

Go to the feast, revel and domineer,

Carouse full measure to her maidenhead.

Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.

But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.

Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret.

I will be master of what is mine own.

She is my goods, my chattels. She is my house,

My household-stuff, my field, my barn,

My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything,

And here she stands, touch her whoever dare.

I’ll bring mine action on the proudest he

That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,

Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves.

Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.

Fear not, sweet wench. They shall not touch thee,

Kate.

I’ll buckler thee against a million.

Exeunt Petruccio, Katherine, and Grumio





BAPTISTA

Nay, let them go-a couple of quiet ones!

GREMIO

Went they not quickly I should die with laughing.

TRANIO

Of all mad matches never was the like.

LUCENTIO

Mistress, what’s your opinion of your sister?

BIANCA

That being mad herself she’s madly mated.

GREMIO

I warrant him, Petruccio is Kated.

BAPTISTA

Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom

wants

For to supply the places at the table,

You know there wants no junkets at the feast.

Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom’s place,

And let Bianca take her sister’s room.

TRANIO

Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?

BAPTISTA

She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let’s go.

Exeunt





4.1 Enter Grumio



GRUMIO Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways. Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so rayed? Was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. Now were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly ere I should come by a fire to thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself, for considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold. Holla! Hoa, Curtis!

Enter Curtis





CURTIS Who is that calls so coldly?

GRUMlO A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis!

CURTIS Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?

GRUMlO O ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire! Cast on no water.

CURTIS Is she so hot a shrew as she’s reported?

GRUMlO She was, good Curtis, before this frost; but thou know’st, winter tames man, woman, and beast, for it hath tamed my old master, and my new mistress, and myself, fellow Curtis.

CURTIS Away, you three-inch fool. I am no beast.

GRUMIO Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I, at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand—she being now at hand—thou shalt soon feel to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office.

CURTIS I prithee, good Grumio, tell me—how goes the world?

GRUMIO A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine. And therefore fire, do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.

CURTIS There’s fire ready, and therefore, good Grumio, the news.

GRUMIO Why, ‘Jack boy, ho boy!’, and as much news as wilt thou.

CURTIS Come, you are so full of cony-catching.

GRUMIO Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold. Where’s the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, the white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on? Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?

CURTIS All ready, and therefore, I pray thee, news.

GRUMIO First, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.

CURTIS How?

GRUMIO Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.

CURTIS Let’s ha’t, good Grumio.

GRUMIO Lend thine ear.

CURTIS Here.

GRUMTO (cuffing him) There.

CURTIS This ’tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

GRUMlO And therefore ’tis called a sensible tale, and this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech listening. Now I begin. Inprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress.

CURTIS Both of one horse?

GRUMIO What’s that to thee?

CURTIS Why, a horse.

GRUMlO Tell thou the tale. But hadst thou not crossed me thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced to thy grave.

CURTIS By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.

GRUMIO Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest. Let their heads be sleekly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit. Let them curtsy with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair of my master’s horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?

CURTIS They are.

GRUMIO Call them forth.

CURTIS (calling) Do you hear, ho? You must meet my master to countenance my mistress.

GRUMIO Why, she hath a face of her own.

CURTIS Who knows not that?

GRUMIO Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.

CURTIS I call them forth to credit her.

Enter four or five servingmen





GRUMIO Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

NATHANIEL Welcome home, Grumio!

PHILIP How now, Grumio?

JOSEPH What, Grumio?

NICHOLAS Fellow Grumio!

NATHANIEL How now, old lad!

GRUMIO Welcome you, how now you, what you, fellow you, and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready and all things neat?

NATHANIEL All things is ready. How near is our master?

GRUMIO E’en at hand, alighted by this, and therefore be not—Cock’s passion, silence! I hear my master.

Enter Petruccio and Katherine





PETRUCCIO

Where be these knaves? What, no man at door

To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse?

Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?

ALL SERVANTS Here, here sir, here sir.

PETRUCCIO

Here sir, here sir, here sir, here sir!

You logger-headed and unpolished grooms,

What! No attendance! No regard! No duty!

Where is the foolish knave I sent before?

GRUMIO

Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.

PETRUCCIO

You peasant swain, you whoreson, malthorse drudge,

Did I not bid thee meet me in the park

And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?

GRUMIO

Nathaniel’s coat, sir, was not fully made,

And Gabriel’s pumps were all unpinked i‘th’ heel.

There was no link to colour Peter’s hat,

And Walter’s dagger was not come from sheathing.

There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory.

The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly.

Yet as they are, here are they come to meet you.

PETRUCCIO

Go, rascals, go and fetch my supper in.

Exeunt servants





(Sings)

‘Where is the life that late I led?

Where are those—’





Sit down, Kate, and welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud.

Enter servants with supper





Why, when, I say?—Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.—

Off with my boots, you rogues, you villains. When?

(Sings)

‘It was the friar of orders gray,

As he forth walked on his way.’

Out, you rogue, you pluck my foot awry.

(Kicking a servant) Take that, and mend the plucking of the other.

Be merry, Kate. (Calling) Some water, here. What, hoa!

Enter one with water





Where’s my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,

And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither—

One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.

(Calling) Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?

Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.

[A servant drops water]





You whoreson villain, will you let it fall?

KATHERINE

Patience, I pray you, ‘twas a fault unwilling.

PETRUCCIO

A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave. Come, Kate, sit down, I know you have a stomach. Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I? 145 What’s this—mutton?

FIRST SERVINGMAN

Ay.

PETRUCCIO

Who brought it?

PETER

I.

PETRUCCIO

’Tis burnt, and so is all the meat.

What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?

How durst you villains bring it from the dresser

And serve it thus to me that love it not?

There, (throwing food) take it to you, trenchers, cups,

and all,

You heedless jolt-heads and unmannered slaves.

What, do you grumble? I’ll be with you straight.

He chases the servants away





KATHERINE

I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet.

The meat was well, if you were so contented.

PETRUCCIO

I tell thee, Kate, ‘twas burnt and dried away,

And I expressly am forbid to touch it,

For it engenders choler, planteth anger,

And better ’twere that both of us did fast,

Since of ourselves ourselves are choleric,

Than feed it with such overroasted flesh.

Be patient, tomorrow’t shall be mended,

And for this night we’ll fast for company.

Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber. Exeunt

Enter servants severally





NATHANIEL Peter, didst ever see the like?

PETER He kills her in her own humour.

Enter Curtis, a servant





GRUMIO Where is he?

CURTIS In her chamber,

Making a sermon of continency to her,

And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,

Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,

And sits as one new risen from a dream.

Away, away, for he is coming hither.

Exeunt

Enter Petruccio





PETRUCCIO

Thus have I politicly begun my reign,

And ‘tis my hope to end successfully.

My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,

And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,

For then she never looks upon her lure.

Another way I have to man my haggard,

To make her come and know her keeper’s call—

That is, to watch her as we watch these kites

That bate and beat, and will not be obedient.

She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat.

Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not.

As with the meat, some undeserved fault

I’ll find about the making of the bed,

And here I’ll fling the pillow, there the bolster,

This way the coverlet, another way the sheets,

Ay, and amid this hurly I intend

That all is done in reverent care of her,

And in conclusion she shall watch all night,

And if she chance to nod I’ll rail and brawl

And with the clamour keep her still awake.

This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,

And thus I’ll curb her mad and headstrong humour.

He that knows better how to tame a shrew,

Now let him speak. ’Tis charity to show.

Exit





4.2 Enter Tranio as Lucentio, and Hortensio as Licio



TRANIO

Is’t possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca

Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?

I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.

HORTENSIO

Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,

Stand by, and mark the manner of his teaching. 5

They stand aside.

Enter Bianca, and Lucentio as Cambio





LUCENTIO

Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?

BIANCA

What, master, read you? First resolve me that.

LUCENTIO

I read that I profess, The Art to Love.

BIANCA

And may you prove, sir, master of your art.

LUCENTIO

While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart. They stand aside

HORTENSIO

Quick proceeders, marry! Now tell me, I pray,

You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca

Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.

TRANIO

O despiteful love, unconstant womankind!

I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.

HORTENSIO

Mistake no more, I am not Licio,

Nor a musician as I seem to be,

But one that scorn to live in this disguise

For such a one as leaves a gentleman

And makes a god of such a cullion.

Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.

TRANIO

Signor Hortensio, I have often heard

Of your entire affection to Bianca,

And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness

I will with you, if you be so contented,

Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.

HORTENSIO

See how they kiss and court. Signor Lucentio,

Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow

Never to woo her more, but do forswear her

As one unworthy all the former favours

That I have fondly flattered her withal.

TRANIO

And here I take the like unfeigned oath

Never to marry with her, though she would entreat.

Fie on her, see how beastly she doth court him!

HORTENSIO

Would all the world but he had quite forsworn.

For me, that I may surely keep mine oath

I will be married to a wealthy widow

Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me

As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.

And so farewell, Signor Lucentio.

Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,

Shall win my love; and so I take my leave,

In resolution as I swore before. Exit

TRANIO

Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace

As ‘longeth to a lover’s blessed case.

Nay, I have ta’en you napping, gentle love,

And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

BIANCA

Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?

TRANIO

Mistress, we have.

LUCENTIO Then we are rid of Licio.

TRANIO

I’faith, he’ll have a lusty widow now,

That shall be wooed and wedded in a day.

BIANCA God give him joy.

TRANIO Ay, and he’ll tame her.

BIANCA He says so, Tranio.

TRANIO

Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.

BIANCA

The taming-school—what, is there such a place?

TRANIO

Ay, mistress, and Petruccio is the master,

That teacheth tricks eleven-and-twenty long

To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

Enter Biondello





BIONDELLO

O, master, master, I have watched so long

That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied

An ancient angel coming down the hill

Will serve the turn.

TRANIO What is he, Biondello?

BIONDELLO

Master, a marcantant or a pedant,

I know not what, but formal in apparel,

In gait and countenance surely like a father.

LUCENTIO And what of him, Tranio?

TRANIO

If he be credulous and trust my tale,

I’ll make him glad to seem Vincentio

And give assurance to Baptista Minola

As if he were the right Vincentio.

Take in your love, and then let me alone.

Exeunt Lucentio and Bianca

Enter a Pedant





PEDANT

God save you, sir.

TRANIO

And you, sir. You are welcome.

Travel you farre on, or are you at the farthest?

PEDANT

Sir, at the farthest for a week or two,

But then up farther and as far as Rome,

And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.

TRANIO

What countryman, I pray?

PEDANT

Of Mantua.

TRANIO

Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid,

And come to Padua careless of your life!

PEDANT

My life, sir? How, I pray? For that goes hard.

TRANIO

‘Tis death for anyone in Mantua

To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?

Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,

For private quarrel ’twixt your Duke and him,

Hath published and proclaimed it openly.

’Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come,

You might have heard it else proclaimed about.

PEDANT

Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so,

For I have bills for money by exchange

From Florence, and must here deliver them.

TRANIO

Well, sir, to do you courtesy

This will I do, and this I will advise you.

First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?

PEDANT

Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,

Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

TRANIO

Among them know you one Vincentio?

PEDANT

I know him not, but I have heard of him,

A merchant of incomparable wealth.

TRANIO

He is my father, sir, and sooth to say,

In count’nance somewhat doth resemble you.

BIONDELLO (aside) As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.

TRANIO

To save your life in this extremity

This favour will I do you for his sake,

And think it not the worst of all your fortunes

That you are like to Sir Vincentio.

His name and credit shall you undertake,

And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.

Look that you take upon you as you should.

You understand me, sir? So shall you stay

Till you have done your business in the city.

If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.

PEDANT

O sir, I do, and will repute you ever

The patron of my life and liberty.

TRANIO

Then go with me to make the matter good.

This, by the way, I let you understand—

My father is here looked for every day

To pass assurance of a dower in marriage

’Twixt me and one Baptista’s daughter here.

In all these circumstances I’ll instruct you.

Go with me to clothe you as becomes you. Exeunt





4.3 Enter Katherine and Grumio



GRUMIO

No, no, forsooth. I dare not, for my life.

KATHERINE

The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.

What, did he marry me to famish me?

Beggars that come unto my father’s door

Upon entreaty have a present alms,

If not, elsewhere they meet with charity.

But I, who never knew how to entreat,

Nor never needed that I should entreat,

Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,

With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed,

And that which spites me more than all these wants,

He does it under name of perfect love,

As who should say if I should sleep or eat

‘Twere deadly sickness, or else present death.

I prithee, go and get me some repast.

I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

GRUMIO What say you to a neat’s foot?

KATHERINE

‘Tis passing good. I prithee, let me have it.

GRUMIO

I fear it is too choleric a meat.

How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?

KATHERINE

I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.

GRUMIO

I cannot tell, I fear ’tis choleric.

What say you to a piece of beef, and mustard?

KATHERINE

A dish that I do love to feed upon.

GRUMIO

Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.

KATHERINE

Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.

GRUMIO

Nay, then I will not. You shall have the mustard,

Or else you get no beef of Grumio.

KATHERINE

Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.

GRUMIO

Why then, the mustard without the beef.

KATHERINE

Go, get thee gone, thou false, deluding slave,

(Beating him) That feed’st me with the very name of

meat.

Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,

That triumph thus upon my misery.

Go, get thee gone, I say.

Enter Petruccio and Hortensio, with meat





PETRUCCIO

How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?

HORTENSIO

Mistress, what cheer?

KATHERINE

Faith, as cold as can be.

PETRUCCIO

Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.

Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am

To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee. 40

I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.

What, not a word? Nay then, thou lov’st it not,

And all my pains is sorted to no proof.

Here, take away this dish.

KATHERINE I pray you, let it stand.

PETRUCCIO

The poorest service is repaid with thanks,

And so shall mine before you touch the meat.

KATHERINE I thank you, sir.

HORTENSIO

Signor Petruccio, fie, you are to blame.

Come, Mistress Kate, I’ll bear you company.

PETRUCCIO (aside)

Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lov’st me.

(To Katherine) Much good do it unto thy gentle heart.

Kate, eat apace; and now, my honey love,

Will we return unto thy father’s house,

And revel it as bravely as the best,

With silken coats, and caps, and golden rings,

With ruffs, and cuffs, and farthingales, and things,

With scarves, and fans, and double change of

bravery,

With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knavery.

What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure,

To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.

Enter Tailor with a gown





Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments.

Lay forth the gown.

Enter Haberdasher with a cap





What news with you, sir?

HABERDASHER

Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

PETRUCCIO

Why, this was moulded on a porringer—

A velvet dish. Fie, fie, ‘tis lewd and filthy.

Why, ’tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,

A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby’s cap.

Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.

KATHERINE

I’ll have no bigger. This doth fit the time,

And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.

PETRUCCIO

When you are gentle you shall have one, too,

And not till then.

HORTENSIO (aside) That will not be in haste.

KATHERINE

Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,

And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.

Your betters have endured me say my mind,

And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.

My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,

Or else my heart concealing it will break,

And rather than it shall I will be free

Even to the uttermost as I please in words.

PETRUCCIO

Why, thou sayst true. It is a paltry cap,

A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.

I love thee well in that thou lik’st it not.

KATHERINE

Love me or love me not, I like the cap

And it I will have, or I will have none.

[Exit Haberdasher]

PETRUCCIO

Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see’t.

O mercy, God, what masquing stuff is here?

What’s this—a sleeve? ‘Tis like a demi-cannon.

What, up and down carved like an apple-tart?

Here’s snip, and nip, and cut, and slish and slash,

Like to a scissor in a barber’s shop.

Why, what o’ devil’s name, tailor, call’st thou this?

HORTENSIO (aside)

I see she’s like to have nor cap nor gown.

TAILOR

You bid me make it orderly and well,

According to the fashion and the time.

PETRUCCIO

Marry, and did, but if you be remembered

I did not bid you mar it to the time.

Go hop me over every kennel home,

For you shall hop without my custom, sir.

I’ll none of it. Hence, make your best of it.

KATHERINE

I never saw a better fashioned gown,

More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.

Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

PETRUCCIO

Why true, he means to make a puppet of thee.

TAILOR She says your worship means to make a puppet of her.

PETRUCCIO

O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou

thimble,

Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail,

Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket, thou.

Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread!

Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,

Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard

As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv’st.

I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.

TAILOR

Your worship is deceived. The gown is made

Just as my master had direction.

Grumio gave order how it should be done.

GRUMIO

I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.

TAILOR

But how did you desire it should be made?

GRUMIO Marry, sir, with needle and thread.

TAILOR

But did you not request to have it cut?

GRUMIO Thou hast faced many things.

TAILOR I have.

GRUMIO Face not me. Thou hast braved many men. Brave not me. I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto thee I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces. Ergo thou liest.

TAILOR (showing a paper) Why, here is the note of the fashion, to testify.

PETRUCCIO Read it.

GRUMIO The note lies in’s throat if he say I said so.

TAILOR (reads) ‘Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown.’

GRUMIO Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. I said a gown.

PETRUCCIO Proceed.

TAILOR (reads) ‘With a small compassed cape.’

GRUMIO I confess the cape.

TAILOR (reads) ‘With a trunk sleeve.’

GRUMIO I confess two sleeves.

TAILOR (reads) ‘The sleeves curiously cut.’

PETRUCCIO Ay, there’s the villany.

GRUMIO Error i‘th’ bill, sir, error i’th’ bill. I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that I’ll prove upon thee though thy little finger be armed in a thimble. 146

TAILOR This is true that I say. An I had thee in place where, thou shouldst know it.

GRUMIO I am for thee straight. Take thou the bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

HORTENSIO Godamercy, Grumio, then he shall have no odds.

PETRUCCIO

Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.

GRUMIO You are i‘th’ right, sir. ‘Tis for my mistress.

PETRUCCIO (to the Tailor)

Go, take it up unto thy master’s use.

GRUMIO (to the Tailor) Villain, not for thy life. Take up my mistress’ gown for thy master’s use!

PETRUCCIO Why, sir, what’s your conceit in that?

GRUMIO O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. ‘Take up my mistress’ gown to his master’s use’—O fie, fie, fie!

PETRUCCIO (aside)

Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.

(To the Tailor) Go, take it hence. Be gone, and say no

more.

HORTENSIO (aside to the Tailor)

Tailor, I’ll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow.

Take no unkindness of his hasty words.

Away, I say. Commend me to thy master.

Exit Tailor

PETRUCCIO

Well, come, my Kate. We will unto your father’s

Even in these honest, mean habiliments.

Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,

For ‘tis the mind that makes the body rich,

And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,

So honour peereth in the meanest habit.

What, is the jay more precious than the lark

Because his feathers are more beautiful?

Or is the adder better than the eel

Because his painted skin contents the eye?

O no, good Kate, neither art thou the worse

For this poor furniture and mean array.

If thou account’st it shame, lay it on me,

And therefore frolic; we will hence forthwith

To feast and sport us at thy father’s house.

Go call my men, and let us straight to him,

And bring our horses unto Long Lane end.

There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.

Let’s see, I think ’tis now some seven o’clock,

And well we may come there by dinner-time.

KATHERINE

I dare assure you, sir, ’tis almost two,

And ’twill be supper-time ere you come there.

PETRUCCIO

It shall be seven ere I go to horse.

Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,

You are still crossing it. Sirs, let’t alone.

I will not go today, and ere I do

It shall be what o’clock I say it is.

HORTENSIO (aside)

Why, so this gallant will command the sun.

Exeunt





4.4 Enter Tranio as Lucentio, and the Pedant dressed like Vincentio, booted and bare-headed



TRANIO

Sir, this is the house. Please it you that I call?

PEDANT

Ay, what else. And but I be deceived,

Signor Baptista may remember me

Near twenty years ago in Genoa—

TRANIO

Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.—

Tis well, and hold your own in any case

With such austerity as ‘longeth to a father.

Enter Biondello





PEDANT

I warrant you. But sir, here comes your boy.

’Twere good he were schooled.

TRANIO

Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,

Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.

Imagine ’twere the right Vincentio.

BIONDELLO Tut, fear not me.

TRANIO

But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?

BIONDELLO

I told him that your father was at Venice

And that you looked for him this day in Padua.

TRANIO (giving money)

Thou’rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink.

Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.

Enter Baptista, and Lucentio as Cambio





TRANIO

Signor Baptista, you are happily met.

(To the Pedant) Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.

I pray you stand good father to me now.

Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

PEDANT

Soft, son. (To Baptista) Sir, by your leave, having

come to Padua

To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio

Made me acquainted with a weighty cause

Of love between your daughter and himself,

And for the good report I hear of you,

And for the love he beareth to your daughter,

And she to him, to stay him not too long

I am content in a good father’s care

To have him matched, and if you please to like

No worse than I, upon some agreement

Me shall you find ready and willing

With one consent to have her so bestowed,

For curious I cannot be with you,

Signor Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

BAPTISTA

Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.

Your plainness and your shortness please me well.

Right true it is your son Lucentio here

Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,

Or both dissemble deeply their affections.

And therefore if you say no more than this,

That like a father you will deal with him

And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,

The match is made, and all is done.

Your son shall have my daughter with consent.

TRANIO

I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best

We be affied, and such assurance ta’en

As shall with either part’s agreement stand?

BAPTISTA

Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know

Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants.

Besides, old Gremio is heark’ning still,

And happily we might be interrupted.

TRANIO

Then at my lodging, an it like you.

There doth my father lie, and there this night

We’ll pass the business privately and well.

Send for your daughter by your servant here.

My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.

The worst is this, that at so slender warning

You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

BAPTISTA

It likes me well. Cambio, hie you home

And bid Bianca make her ready straight,

And if you will, tell what hath happened—

Lucentio’s father is arrived in Padua—

And how she’s like to be Lucentio’s wife.

ExitLucentio

BIONDELLO

I pray the gods she may with all my heart.

TRANIO

Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.

Exit Biondello

Signor Baptista, shall I lead the way?

Welcome. One mess is like to be your cheer.

Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.

BAPTISTA I follow you.

Exeunt





4.5 Enter Lucentio and Biondello



BIONDELLO Cambio.

LUCENTIO What sayst thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?

LUCENTIO Biondello, what of that?

BIONDELLO Faith, nothing, but he’s left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

LUCENTIO I pray thee, moralize them.

BIONDELLO Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son.

LUCENTIO And what of him?

BIONDELLO His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

LUCENTIO And then?

BIONDELLO The old priest at Saint Luke’s church is at your command at all hours.

LUCENTIO And what of all this?

BIONDELLO I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance. Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum—to th’ church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses. If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.

LUCENTIO Hear’st thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO I cannot tarry, I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit, and so may you, sir, and so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke’s to bid the priest be ready t’attend against you come with your appendix. Exit

LUCENTIO

I may and will, if she be so contented.

She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt?

Hap what hap may, I’ll roundly go about her.

It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.

Exit





4.6 Enter Petruccio, Katherine, Hortensio, and servants



PETRUCCIO

Come on, i’ God’s name. Once more toward our father’s.

Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!

KATHERINE

The moon?—the sun. It is not moonlight now.

PETRUCCIO

I say it is the moon that shines so bright.

KATHERINE

I know it is the sun that shines so bright. 5

PETRUCCIO

Now, by my mother’s son—and that’s myself—

It shall be moon, or star, or what I list

Or ere I journey to your father’s house.

Go on, and fetch our horses back again.

Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed.

HORTENSIO (to Katherine)

Say as he says or we shall never go.

KATHERINE

Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,

And be it moon or sun or what you please,

And if you please to call it a rush-candle

Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

PETRUCCIO

I say it is the moon.

KATHERINE

I know it is the moon.

PETRUCCIO

Nay then you lie, it is the blessed sun.

KATHERINE

Then God be blessed, it is the blessèd sun,

But sun it is not when you say it is not,

And the moon changes even as your mind.

What you will have it named, even that it is,

And so it shall be still for Katherine.

HORTENSIO

Petruccio, go thy ways. The field is won.

PETRUCCIO

Well, forward, forward. Thus the bowl should run,

And not unluckily against the bias.

But soft, company is coming here.

Enter old Vincentio





(To Vincentio) Good morrow, gentle mistress, where

away?

Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,

Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman,

Such war of white and red within her cheeks?

What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty

As those two eyes become that heavenly face?

Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.

Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty’s sake.

HORTENSIO A will make the man mad to make the woman of him.

KATHERINE

Young budding virgin, fair, and fresh, and sweet,

Whither away, or where is thy abode?

Happy the parents of so fair a child,

Happier the man whom favourable stars

Allots thee for his lovely bedfellow.

PETRUCCIO

Why, how now, Kate, I hope thou art not mad.

This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,

And not a maiden as thou sayst he is.

KATHERINE

Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes

That have been so bedazzled with the sun

That everything I look on seemeth green.

Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.

Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.

PETRUCCIO

Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known

Which way thou travell’st. If along with us,

We shall be joyful of thy company.

VINCENTIO

Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress,

That with your strange encounter much amazed me,

My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,

And bound I am to Padua, there to visit

A son of mine which long I have not seen.

PETRUCCIO

What is his name?

VINCENTIO Lucentio, gentle sir.

PETRUCCIO

Happily met, the happier for thy son.

And now by law as well as reverend age

I may entitle thee my loving father.

The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,

Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,

Nor be not grieved. She is of good esteem,

Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth,

Beside, so qualified as may beseem

The spouse of any noble gentleman.

Let me embrace with old Vincentio,

And wander we to see thy honest son,

Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

He embraces Vincentio





VINCENTIO

But is this true, or is it else your pleasure

Like pleasant travellers to break a jest

Upon the company you overtake?

HORTENSIO

I do assure thee, father, so it is.

PETRUCCIO

Come, go along, and see the truth hereof,

For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

Exeunt all but Hortensio

HORTENSIO

Well, Petruccio, this has put me in heart.

Have to my widow, and if she be froward,

Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.

Exit





5.1 Enter Biondello, Lucentio, and Bianca. Gremio is out before



BIONDELLO Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.

LUCENTIO I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need thee at home, therefore leave us.

BIONDELLO Nay, faith, I’ll see the church a’ your back and then come back to my master’s as soon as I can.

Exeunt Lucentio, Bianca, and Biondello





GREMIO

I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

Enter Petruccio, Katherine, Vincentio, Grumio, with attendants





PETRUCCIO

Sir, here’s the door. This is Lucentio’s house.

My father’s bears more toward the market-place.

Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.

VINCENTIO

You shall not choose but drink before you go.

I think I shall command your welcome here,

And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.

He knocks





GREMIO They’re busy within. You were best knock louder.

Vincentio knocks again. The Pedant looks out of the window





PEDANT What’s he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?

VINCENTIO Is Signor Lucentio within, sir?

PEDANT He’s within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.

VINCENTIO What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?

PEDANT Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. He shall need none so long as I live.

PETRUCCIO (to Vincentio) Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua. (To the Pedant) Do you hear, sir, to leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signor Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.

PEDANT Thou liest. His father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.

VINCENTIO Art thou his father?

PEDANT Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.

PETRUCCIO (to Vincentio) Why, how now, gentleman?Why, this is flat knavery, to take upon you another man’s name.

PEDANT Lay hands on the villain. I believe a means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

Enter Biondello





BIONDELLO (aside) I have seen them in the church together, God send ’em good shipping. But who is here? Mine old master, Vincentio—now we are undone and brought to nothing.

VINCENTIO (to Biondello) Come hither, crackhemp.

BIONDELLO I hope I may choose, sir.

VINCENTIO Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?

BIONDELLO Forgot you? No, sir, I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.

VINCENTIO What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy master’s father, Vincentio?

BIONDELLO What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir, see where he looks out of the window.

VINCENTIO Is’t so indeed?

He beats Biondello





BIONDELLO Help, help, help! Here’s a madman will murder me.

Exit

PEDANT Help, son! Help, Signor Baptista!

Exit above

PETRUCCIO Prithee, Kate, let’s stand aside and see the end of this controversy.

They stand aside.



Enter Pedant with servants, Baptista, Tranio as Lucentio





TRANIO (to Vincentio) Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?

VINCENTIO What am I, sir? Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods, O fine villain, a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a copintank hat—O, I am undone, I am undone! While I play the good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the university.

TRANIO How now, what’s the matter?

BAPTISTA What, is the man lunatic?

TRANIO Sir, you seem a sober, ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman. Why sir, what ‘cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

VINCENTIO Thy father! O villain, he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.

BAPTISTA You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray what do you think is his name?

VINCENTIO His name? As if I knew not his name—I have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.

PEDANT Away, away, mad ass. His name is Lucentio, and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signor Vincentio.

VINCENTIO Lucentio? O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you, in the Duke’s name. O my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?

TRANIO Call forth an officer.

Enter an Officer





Carry this mad knave to the jail. Father Baptista, I

charge you see that he be forthcoming.

VINCENTIO Carry me to the jail?

GREMIO Stay, officer, he shall not go to prison.

BAPTISTA Talk not, Signor Gremio. I say he shall go to prison.

GREMIO Take heed, Signor Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.

PEDANT Swear if thou dar’st.

GREMIO Nay, I dare not swear it.

TRANIO Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.

GREMIO Yes, I know thee to be Signor Lucentio.

BAPTISTA Away with the dotard. To the jail with him.

Enter Biondello, Lucentio, and Bianca





VINCENTIO Thus strangers may be haled and abused. O monstrous villain!

BIONDELLO O, we are spoiled and—yonder he is. Deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.

Exeunt Biondello, Tranio, and Pedant, as fast as may be





LUCENTIO (to Vincentio) Pardon, sweet father.

He kneels





VINCENTIO Lives my sweet son?

BIANCA (to Baptista) Pardon, dear father.

BAPTISTA

How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio?

LUCENTIO

Here’s Lucentio, right son to the right Vincentio,

That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,

While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

GREMIO

Here’s packing with a witness, to deceive us all.

VINCENTIO

Where is that damned villain Tranio,

That faced and braved me in this matter so?

BAPTISTA

Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?

BIANCA

Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

LUCENTIO

Love wrought these miracles. Bianca’s love

Made me exchange my state with Tranio

While he did bear my countenance in the town,

And happily I have arrived at the last

Unto the wished haven of my bliss.

What Tranio did, myself enforced him to.

Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

VINCENTIO I’ll slit the villain’s nose that would have sent me to the jail.

BAPTISTA But do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my good will? 125

VINCENTIO Fear not, Baptista. We will content you. Go to, but I will in to be revenged for this villainy.

Exit

BAPTISTA And I to sound the depth of this knavery. Exit

LUCENTIO Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not frown.

Exeunt Lucentio and Bianca





GREMIO

My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the rest,

Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.

Exit





KATHERINE (coming forward) Husband, let’s follow to see the end of this ado.

PETRUCCIO First kiss me, Kate, and we will.

KATHERINE What, in the midst of the street?

PETRUCCIO What, art thou ashamed of me?

KATHERINE No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.

PETRUCCIO

Why then, let’s home again. Come sirrah, let’s away.

KATHERINE

Nay, I will give thee a kiss. Now pray thee love, stay. They kiss

PETRUCCIO

Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate.

Better once than never, for never too late.

Exeunt





5.2 Enter Baptista, Vincentio, Gremio, the Pedant, Lucentio and Bianca, Petruccio, Katherine, and Hortensio, Tranio, Biondello, Grumio, and the Widow, the servingmen with Tranio bringing in a banquet



LUCENTIO

At last, though long, our jarring notes agree,

And time it is when raging war is done

To smile at scapes and perils overblown.

My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,

While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine.

Brother Petruccio, sister Katherina,

And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,

Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.

My banquet is to close our stomachs up

After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down,

For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

They sit





PETRUCCIO

Nothing but sit, and sit, and eat, and eat.

BAPTISTA

Padua affords this kindness, son Petruccio.

PETRUCCIO

Padua affords nothing but what is kind.

HORTENSIO

For both our sakes I would that word were true. 15

PETRUCCIO

Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.

WIDOW

Then never trust me if I be afeard.

PETRUCCIO

You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense.

I mean Hortensio is afeard of you.

WIDOW

He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.

PETRUCCIO Roundly replied.

KATHERINE Mistress, how mean you that?

WIDOW Thus I conceive by him.

PETRUCCIO

Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?

HORTENSIO

My widow says thus she conceives her tale.

PETRUCCIO Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.

KATHERINE

‘He that is giddy thinks the world turns round’—

I pray you tell me what you meant by that.

WIDOW

Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,

Measures my husband’s sorrow by his woe.

And now you know my meaning.

KATHERINE

A very mean meaning.

WIDOW

Right, I mean you.

KATHERINE

And I am mean indeed respecting you.

PETRUCCIO To her, Kate!

HORTENSIO To her, widow!

PETRUCCIO

A hundred marks my Kate does put her down.

HORTENSIO That’s my office.

PETRUCCIO

Spoke like an officer! Ha’ to thee, lad.

He drinks to Hortensio





BAPTISTA

How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?

GREMIO

Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

BIANCA

Head and butt? An hasty-witted body

Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

VINCENTIO

Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?

BIANCA

Ay, but not frighted me, therefore I’ll sleep again.

PETRUCCIO

Nay, that you shall not. Since you have begun,

Have at you for a better jest or two.

BIANCA

Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,

And then pursue me as you draw your bow.

You are welcome all.

Exit Bianca with Katherine and the Widow

PETRUCCIO

She hath prevented me here, Signor Tranio.

This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.

Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.

TRANIO

O sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound,

Which runs himself and catches for his master.

PETRUCCIO

A good swift simile, but something currish.

TRANIO

‘Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself.

’Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.

BAPTISTA

O, O, Petruccio, Tranio hits you now.

LUCENTIO

I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

HORTENSIO

Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?

PETRUCCIO

A has a little galled me, I confess,

And as the jest did glance away from me,

‘Tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.

BAPTISTA

Now in good sadness, son Petruccio,

I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

PETRUCCIO

Well, I say no.—And therefore, Sir Assurance,

Let’s each one send unto his wife,

And he whose wife is most obedient

To come at first when he doth send for her

Shall win the wager which we will propose.

HORTENSIO Content. What’s the wager?

LUCFNTIO Twenty crowns.

PETRUCCIO Twenty crowns!

I’ll venture so much of my hawk or hound,

But twenty times so much upon my wife.

LUCENTIO A hundred, then.

HORTENSIO Content.

PETRUCCIO A match, ‘tis done.

HORTENSIO Who shall begin?

LUCENTIO That will I.

Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

BIONDELLO I go.

Exit

BAPTISTA

Son, I’ll be your half Bianca comes.

LUCENTIO

I’ll have no halves, I’ll bear it all myself.

Enter Biondello





How now, what news?

BIONDELLO

Sir, my mistress sends you word

That she is busy and she cannot come.

PETRUCCIO

How? She’s busy and she cannot come?

Is that an answer?

GREMlO Ay, and a kind one, too.

Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

PETRUCCIO

I hope, better.

HORTENSIO

Sirrah Biondello,

Go and entreat my wife to come to me forthwith.

Exit Biondello

PETRUCCIO

O ho, ‘entreat’ her—nay, then she must needs come.

HORTENSIO

I am afraid, sir, do what you can,

Enter Biondello





Yours will not be entreated. Now, where’s my wife?

BIONDELLO

She says you have some goodly jest in hand.

She will not come. She bids you come to her.

PETRUCCIO

Worse and worse! She will not come—O vile,

Intolerable, not to be endured!

Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress.

Say I command her come to me.

Exit Grumio

HORTENSIO

I know her answer.

PETRUCCIO

What?

HORTENSIO

She will not.

PETRUCCIO

The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

Enter Katherine





BAPTISTA

Now by my halidom, here comes Katherina.

KATHERINE (to Petruccio)

What is your will, sir, that you send for me?

PETRUCCIO

Where is your sister and Hortensio’s wife?

KATHERINE

They sit conferring by the parlour fire.

PETRUCCIO

Go, fetch them hither. If they deny to come,

Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.

Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.

Exit Katherine





LUCENTIO

Here is a wonder, if you talk of wonders.

HORTENSIO

And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.

PETRUCCIO

Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life;

An aweful rule and right supremacy,

And, to be short, what not that’s sweet and happy.

BAPTISTA

Now fair befall thee, good Petruccio,

The wager thou hast won, and I will add

Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,

Another dowry to another daughter,

For she is changed as she had never been.

PETRUCCIO

Nay, I will win my wager better yet,

And show more sign of her obedience,

Her new-built virtue and obedience.

Enter Katherine, Bianca, and the Widow





See where she comes, and brings your froward wives

As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.

Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not.

Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.

Katherine throws down her cap

WIDOW

Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh

Till I be brought to such a silly pass.

BIANCA

Fie, what a foolish duty call you this?

LUCENTIO

I would your duty were as foolish, too.

The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,

Hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time.

BIANCA

The more fool you for laying on my duty.

PETRUCCIO

Katherine, I charge thee tell these headstrong women

What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.

WIDOW

Come, come, you’re mocking. We will have no telling.

PETRUCCIO

Come on, I say, and first begin with her.

WIDOW She shall not.

PETRUCCIO

I say she shall: and first begin with her.

KATHERINE

Fie, fie, unknit that threat’ning, unkind brow,

And dart not scornful glances from those eyes

To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.

It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,

Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,

And in no sense is meet or amiable.

A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,

Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,

And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty

Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.

Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,

Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee,

And for thy maintenance commits his body

To painful labour both by sea and land,

To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,

Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,

And craves no other tribute at thy hands

But love, fair looks, and true obedience,

Too little payment for so great a debt.

Such duty as the subject owes the prince,

Even such a woman oweth to her husband,

And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,

And not obedient to his honest will,

What is she but a foul contending rebel,

And graceless traitor to her loving lord?

I am ashamed that women are so simple

To offer war where they should kneel for peace,

Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway

When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.

Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,

Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,

But that our soft conditions and our hearts

Should well agree with our external parts?

Come, come, you froward and unable worms,

My mind hath been as big as one of yours,

My heart as great, my reason haply more,

To bandy word for word and frown for frown;

But now I see our lances are but straws,

Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,

That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.

Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,

And place your hands below your husband’s foot,

In token of which duty, if he please,

My hand is ready, may it do him ease.

PETRUCCIO

Why, there’s a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.

They kiss





LUCENTIO

Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha’t.

VINCENTIO

‘Tis a good hearing when children are toward.

LUCENTIO

But a harsh hearing when women are froward.

PETRUCCIO Come, Kate, we’ll to bed.

We three are married, but you two are sped.

’Twas I won the wager, though (to Lucentio) you hit

the white,

And being a winner, God give you good night.

Exit Petruccio with Katherine

HORTENSIO

Now go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.

LUCENTIO

’Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

Exeunt

ADDITIONAL PASSAGES



The Taming of A Shrew, printed in 1594 and believed to derive from Shakespeare’s play as performed, contains episodes continuing and rounding off the Christopher Sly framework which may echo passages written by Shakespeare but not printed in the Folio. They are given below.



A. The following exchange occurs at a point for which there is no exact equivalent in Shakespeare’s play. It could come at the end of 2.1.The ‘fool’ of the first line is Sander, the counterpart of Grumio.

Then Sly speaks





SLY Sim, when will the fool come again?

LORD He’ll come again, my lord, anon.

SLY Gi’s some more drink here. Zounds, where’s the tapster? Here, Sim, eat some of these things.

LORD So I do, my lord.

SLY Here, Sim, I drink to thee.

LORD My lord, here comes the players again.

SLY O brave, here’s two fine gentlewomen.





B. This passage comes between 4.5 and 4.6. If it originates with Shakespeare it implies that Grumio accompanies Petruccio at the beginning of 4.6.

SLY Sim, must they be married now?

LORD Ay, my lord.

Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander





SLY Look, Sim, the fool is come again now.





C. Sly interrupts the action of the play-within-play. This is at 5.1.102 of Shakespeare’s play.

Phylotus and Valeria runs away.

Then Sly speaks





SLY I say we’ll have no sending to prison.

LORD My lord, this is but the play. They’re but in jest.

SLY I tell thee, Sim, we’ll have no sending to prison, that’s flat. Why, Sim, am not I Don Christo Vary? Therefore I say they shall not go to prison.

LORD No more they shall not, my lord. They be run away.

SLY Are they run away, Sim? That’s well. Then gi’s some more drink, and let them play again.

LORD Here, my lord.

Sly drinks and then falls asleep





D. Sly is carried off between 5.1 and 5.2.

Exeunt omnes





Sly sleeps

LORD

Who’s within there? Come hither, sirs, my lord’s

Asleep again. Go take him easily up

And put him in his own apparel again,

And lay him in the place where we did find him

Just underneath the alehouse side below.

But see you wake him not in any case.

BOY

It shall be done, my lord. Come help to bear him hence.

Exit

E. The conclusion.

Then enter two bearing of Sly in his own apparel again and leaves him where they found him and then goes out. Then enter the Tapster





TAPSTER

Now that the darksome night is overpast

And dawning day appears in crystal sky,

Now must I haste abroad. But soft, who’s this?

What, Sly! O wondrous, hath he lain here all night?

I’ll wake him. I think he’s starved by this,

But that his belly was so stuffed with ale.

What ho, Sly, awake, for shame!

SLY Sim, gi’s some more wine. What, ’s all the players gone? Am not I a lord?

TAPSTER

A lord with a murrain! Come, art thou drunken still?

SLY

Who’s this? Tapster? O Lord, sirrah, I have had

The bravest dream tonight that ever thou

Heardest in all thy life.

TAPSTER

Ay, marry, but you had best get you home,

For your wife will course you for dreaming here tonight.

SLY

Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew.

I dreamt upon it all this night till now,

And thou hast waked me out of the best dream

That ever I had in my life. But I’ll to my

Wife presently and tame her too,

An if she anger me.

TAPSTER

Nay, tarry, Sly, for I’ll go home with thee

And hear the rest that thou hast dreamt tonight.

Exeunt omnes





