The History of King Lear





Sc. 1 Enter the Earl of Kent, the Duke of Gloucester, and Edmund the bastard



KENT I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.

GLOUCESTER It did always seem so to us, but now in the division of the kingdoms it appears not which of the Dukes he values most; for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.

KENT Is not this your son, my lord?

GLOUCESTER His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazed to it.

KENT I cannot conceive you.

GLOUCESTER Sir, this young fellow’s mother could, whereupon she grew round-wombed and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?

KENT I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.

GLOUCESTER But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged. (To Edmund) Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmund?

EDMUND No, my lord.

GLOUCESTER (to Edmund) My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.

EDMUND (to Kent) My services to your lordship.

KENT I must love you, and sue to know you better.

EDMUND Sir, I shall study deserving.

GLOUCESTER (to Kent) He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.

Sound a sennet





The King is coming.

Enter one bearing a coronet, then King Lear, then the Dukes of Albany and Cornwall; next Gonoril, Regan, Cordelia, with followers





LEAR

Attend my lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER I shall, my liege.

⌈Exit⌉

LEAR

Meantime we will express our darker purposes.

The map there. Know we have divided

In three our kingdom, and ’tis our first intent

To shake all cares and business off our state,

Confirming them on younger years.

The two great princes, France and Burgundy—

Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love—

Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,

And here are to be answered. Tell me, my daughters,

Which of you shall we say doth love us most,

That we our largest bounty may extend

Where merit doth most challenge it?

Gonoril, our eldest born, speak first.

GONORIL

Sir, I do love you more than words can wield the

matter;

Dearer than eyesight, space, or liberty;

Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;

No less than life; with grace, health, beauty, honour;

As much as child e’er loved, or father, friend;

A love that makes breath poor and speech unable.

Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

CORDELIA (aside)

What shall Cordelia do? Love and be silent.

LEAR (to Gonoril)

Of all these bounds even from this line to this,

With shady forests and wide skirted meads,

We make thee lady. To thine and Albany’s issue

Be this perpetual.—What says our second daughter?

Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall, speak.

REGAN Sir, I am made

Of the self-same mettle that my sister is,

And prize me at her worth. In my true heart

I find she names my very deed of love—

Only she came short, that I profess

Myself an enemy to all other joys

Which the most precious square of sense possesses,

And find I am alone felicitate

In your dear highness’ love.

CORDELIA (aside) Then poor Cordelia—

And yet not so, since I am sure my love’s

More richer than my tongue.

LEAR (to Regan)

To thee and thine hereditary ever

Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, No less in space, validity, and pleasure

Than that confirmed on Gonoril. (To Cordelia) But

now our joy,

Although the last, not least in our dear love:

What can you say to win a third more opulent

Than your sisters?

CORDELIA Nothing, my lord.

LEAR

How? Nothing can come of nothing. Speak again.

CORDELIA

Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave

My heart into my mouth. I love your majesty

According to my bond, nor more nor less.

LEAR

Go to, go to, mend your speech a little

Lest it may mar your fortunes.

CORDELIA Good my lord,

You have begot me, bred me, loved me.

I return those duties back as are right fit—

Obey you, love you, and most honour you.

Why have my sisters husbands if they say

They love you all? Haply when I shall wed

That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry

Half my love with him, half my care and duty.

Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,

To love my father all.

LEAR But goes this with thy heart?

CORDELIA Ay, good my lord.

LEAR So young and so untender?

CORDELIA So young, my lord, and true.

LEAR

Well, let it be so. Thy truth then he thy dower;

For by the sacred radiance of the sun,

The mysteries of Hecate and the night,

By all the operation of the orbs

From whom we do exist and cease to be,

Here I disclaim all my paternal care,

Propinquity, and property of blood,

And as a stranger to my heart and me

Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,

Or he that makes his generation

Messes to gorge his appetite,

Shall be as well neighboured, pitied, and relieved

As thou, my sometime daughter.

KENT Good my +liege-

LEAR

Peace, Kent. Come not between the dragon and his

wrath.

I loved her most, and thought to set my rest

On her kind nursery. ⌈To Cordelia⌉ Hence, and avoid

my sight!—

So be my grave my peace as here I give

Her father’s heart from her. Call France. Who stirs?

Call Burgundy.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

Cornwall and Albany,

With my two daughters’ dowers digest this third.

Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.

I do invest you jointly in my power,

Pre-eminence, and all the large effects

That troop with majesty. Ourself by monthly course,

With reservation of an hundred knights

By you to be sustained, shall our abode

Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain

The name and all the additions to a king.

The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,

Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,

This crownet part betwixt you.

KENT Royal Lear,

Whom I have ever honoured as my king,

Loved as my father, as my master followed,

As my great patron thought on in my prayers—

LEAR

The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

KENT

Let it fall rather, though the fork invade

The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly

When Lear is mad. What wilt thou do, old man?

Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak

When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour’s

bound

When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom,

And in thy best consideration check

This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgement,

Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,

Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound

Reverbs no hollowness.

LEAR Kent, on thy life, no more!

KENT

My life I never held but as a pawn

To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it,

Thy safety being the motive.

LEAR Out of my sight!

KENT

See better, Lear, and let me still remain

The true blank of thine eye.

LEAR Now, by Apollo-

KENT

Now, by Apollo, King, thou swear’st thy gods in vain.

LEAR ⌈making to strike himl ⌉

Vassal, recreant!

KENT Do, kill thy physician,

And the fee bestow upon the foul disease.

Revoke thy doom, or whilst I can vent clamour

From my throat I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.

LEAR

Hear me; on thy allegiance hear me!

Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,

Which we durst never yet, and with strayed pride

To come between our sentence and our power,

Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,

Our potency made good take thy reward:

Four days we do allot thee for provision

To shield thee from dis-eases of the world,

And on the fifth to turn thy hated back

Upon our kingdom. If on the next day following

Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,

The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,

This shall not be revoked.

KENT

Why, fare thee well, King; since thus thou wilt

appear,

Friendship lives hence, and banishment is here.

(To Cordelia) The gods to their protection take thee,

maid,

That rightly thinks, and hast most justly said.

(To Gonoril and Regan)





And your large speeches may your deeds approve,

That good effects may spring from words of love.

Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;

He’ll shape his old course in a country new.

Exit

Enter the King of France and the Duke of

Burgundy, with the Duke of Gloucester





GLOUCESTER

Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

LEAR My lord of Burgundy,

We first address towards you, who with a king

Hath rivalled for our daughter: what in the least

Will you require in present dower with her

Or cease your quest of love?

BURGUNDY Royal majesty,

I crave no more than what your highness offered;

Nor will you tender less.

LEAR Right noble Burgundy,

When she was dear to us we did hold her so;

But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands.

If aught within that little seeming substance,

Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,

And nothing else, may fitly like your grace,

She’s there, and she is yours.

BURGUNDY I know no answer.

LEAR

Sir, will you with those infirmities she owes,

Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,

Covered with our curse and strangered with our oath,

Take her or leave her?

BURGUNDY Pardon me, royal sir.

Election makes not up on such conditions.

LEAR

Then leave her, sir; for by the power that made me,

I tell you all her wealth. (To France) For you, great

King,

I would not from your love make such a stray

To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you

To avert your liking a more worthier way

Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed

Almost to acknowledge hers.

FRANCE

This is most strange, that she that even but now

Was your best object, the argument of your praise,

Balm of your age, most best, most dearest,

Should in this trice of time commit a thing

So monstrous to dismantle

So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence

Must be of such unnatural degree

That monsters it, or your fore-vouched affections

Fall’n into taint; which to believe of her

Must be a faith that reason without miracle

Could never plant in me.

CORDELIA (to Lear)

I yet beseech your majestyIf for I want that glib and oily art

To speak and purpose not—since what I well intend,

I’ll do’t before I speak—that you acknow

It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,

No unclean action or dishonoured step

That hath deprived me of your grace and favour,

But even the want of that for which I am rich—

A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue

As I am glad I have not, though not to have it

Hath lost me in your liking.

LEAR Go to, go to.

Better thou hadst not been born than not to have

pleased me better.

FRANCE

Is it no more but this—a tardiness in nature,

That often leaves the history unspoke

That it intends to do?—My lord of Burgundy,

What say you to the lady? Love is not love

When it is mingled with respects that stands

Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?

She is herself a dower.

BURGUNDY Royal Lear,

Give but that portion which yourself proposed,

And here I take Cordelia by the hand,

Duchess of Burgundy—

LEAR Nothing. I have sworn.

BURGUNDY (to Cordelia)

I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father

That you must lose a husband.

CORDELIA

Peace be with Burgundy; since that respects

Of fortune are his love, I shall not be his wife.

FRANCE

Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;

Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised:

Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.

Be it lawful, I take up what’s cast away.

Gods, gods! ‘Tis strange that from their cold’st neglect

My love should kindle to inflamed respect.—

Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,

Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.

Not all the dukes in wat’rish Burgundy

Shall buy this unprized precious maid of me.—

Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.

Thou losest here, a better where to find.

LEAR

Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we

Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see

That face of hers again. Therefore be gone,

Without our grace, our love, our benison.—

Come, noble Burgundy.

[Flourish.! Exeunt Lear and Burgundy, then

Albany, Cornwall, Gloucester, ⌈Edmund,⌉

and followers

FRANCE (to Cordelia) Bid farewell to your sisters.

CORDELIA

Ye jewels of our father, with washed eyes

Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,

And like a sister am most loath to call

Your faults as they are named. Use well our father.

To your professed bosoms I commit him.

But yet, alas, stood I within his grace

I would prefer him to a better place.

So farewell to you both.

GONORIL Prescribe not us our duties.

REGAN Let your study

Be to content your lord, who hath received you

At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted,

And well are worth the worst that you have wanted.

CORDELIA

Time shall unfold what pleated cunning hides.

Who covers faults, at last shame them derides.

Well may you prosper.

FRANCE Come, fair Cordelia.

Exeunt France and Cordelia

GONORIL Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.

REGAN That’s most certain, and with you. Next month with us.

GONORIL You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we have made of it hath not been little. He always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgement he hath now cast her off appears too gross.

REGAN ’Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.

GONORIL The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must we look to receive from his age not alone the imperfection of long-engrafted condition, but therewithal unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.

REGAN Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s banishment.

GONORIL There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and him. Pray, let’s hit together. If our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.

REGAN We shall further think on’t.

GONORIL We must do something, and l’th’ heat. Exeunt





Sc. 2 Enter Edmund the bastard



EDMUND

Thou, nature, art my goddess. To thy law

My services are bound. Wherefore should I

Stand in the plague of custom and permit

The curiosity of nations to deprive me

For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines

Lag of a brother? Why ‘bastard’? Wherefore ‘base’,

When my dimensions are as well compact,

My mind as generous, and my shape as true

As honest madam’s issue?

Why brand they us with ‘base, base bastardy’,

Who in the lusty stealth of nature take

More composition and fierce quality

Than doth within a stale, dull-eyed bed go

To the creating a whole tribe of fops

Got ’tween a sleep and wake? Well then,

Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.

Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund

As to the legitimate. Well, my legitimate, if

This letter speed and my invention thrive,

Edmund the base shall to th’ legitimate.

I grow, I prosper. Now gods, stand up for bastards!

Enter the Duke of Gloucester. Edmund reads a letter





GLOUCESTER

Kent banished thus, and France in choler parted,

And the King gone tonight, subscribed his power,

Confined to exhibition—all this done

Upon the gad?—Edmund, how now? What news?

EDMUND So please your lordship, none.

GLOUCESTER Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?

EDMUND I know no news, my lord.

GLOUCESTER What paper were you reading?

EDMUND Nothing., my lord.

GLOUCESTER No? What needs then that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come, if it be nothing I shall not need spectacles.

EDMUND I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother that I have not all o’er-read; for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your liking.

GLOUCESTER Give me the letter, sir.

EDMUND I shall offend either to detain or give it. The contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.

GLOUCESTER Let’s see, let’s see.

EDMUND I hope for my brother’s justification he wrote this but as an assay or taste of my virtue.

He gives Gloucester a letter





GLOUCESTER (reads) ‘This policy of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever and live the beloved of your brother, Edgar.’ Hum, conspiracy! ‘Slept till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue’—my son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this, a heart and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?

EDMUND It was not brought me, my lord, there’s the cunning of it. I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

GLOUCESTER You know the character to be your brother’s?

EDMUND If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his; but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.

GLOUCESTER It is his.

EDMUND It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is not in the contents.

GLOUCESTER Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business? 70

EDMUND Never, my lord; but I have often heard him maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and fathers declining, his father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage the revenue.

GLOUCESTER O villain, villain—his very opinion in the tetter! Abhorred villain, unnatural, detested, brutish villain—worse than brutish! Go, sir, seek him, ay, apprehend him. Abominable villain! Where is he?

EDMUND I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of this intent, you should run a certain course; where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no further pretence of danger.

GLOUCESTER Think you so?

EDMUND If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very evening.

GLOUCESTER He cannot be such a monster.

EDMUND Nor is pilot, sure.

GLOUCESTER To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him—heaven and earth! Edmund seek him out, wind me into him. I pray you, frame your business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.

EDMUND I shall seek him, sir, presently, convey the business as I shall see means, and acquaint you withal.

GLOUCESTER These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide; in cities mutinies, in countries discords, palaces treason, the bond cracked between son and father. Find out this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing. Do it carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished, his offence honesty! Strange, strange! Exit

EDMUND This is the excellent foppery of the world: that when we are sick in fortune—often the surfeit of our own behaviour—we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if we were villains by necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and treacherers by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of stars! My father compounded with my mother under the Dragon’s tail and my nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am had the maidenliest star of the firmament twinkled on my bastardy. Edgar ...

Enter Edgar





and on’s cue out he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy; mine is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like them of Bedlam.—O, these eclipses do portend these divisions.

EDGAR How now, brother Edmund, what serious contemplation are you in?

EDMUND I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.

EDGAR Do you busy yourself about that?

EDMUND I promise you, the effects he writ of succeed unhappily, as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.

EDGAR How long have you been a sectary astronomical?

EDMUND Come, come, when saw you my father last?

EDGAR Why, the night gone by.

EDMUND Spake you with him?

EDGAR Two hours together.

EDMUND Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?

EDGAR None at all.

EDMUND Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him, and at my entreaty forbear his presence till some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would scarce allay.

EDGAR Some villain hath done me wrong.

EDMUND That’s my fear, brother. I advise you to the best. Go armed. I am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you. I have told you what I have seen and heard but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. Pray you, away.

EDGAR Shall I hear from you anon?

EDMUND I do serve you in this business.

Exit Edgar

A credulous father, and a brother noble,

Whose nature is so far from doing harms

That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty

My practices ride easy. I see the business.

Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit.

All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.

Exit





Sc. 3 Enter Gonoril and Oswald, her gentleman



GONORIL

Did my father strike my gentleman

For chiding of his fool?

OSWALD Yes, madam.

GONORIL

By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour

He flashes into one gross crime or other

That sets us all at odds. I’ll not endure it.

His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us

On every trifle. When he returns from hunting

I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.

If you come slack of former services

You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer.

⌈Hunting horns within⌉





OSWALD He’s coming, madam. I hear him.

GONORIL

Put on what weary negligence you please,

You and your fellow servants. I’d have it come in

question.

If he dislike it, let him to our sister,

Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,

Not to be overruled. Idle old man,

That still would manage those authorities

That he hath given away! Now, by my life,

Old fools are babes again, and must be used

With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused.

Remember what I tell you.

OSWALD Very well, madam.

GONORIL

And let his knights have colder looks among you.

What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.

I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,

That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister

To hold my very course. Go prepare for dinner.

Exeunt severally





Sc. 4 Enter the Earl of Kent, disguised



KENT

If but as well I other accents borrow

That can my speech diffuse, my good intent

May carry through itself to that full issue

For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent,

If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned,

Thy master, whom thou lov’st, shall find thee full of

labour.

Enter King Lear and servants from hunting





LEAR Let me not stay a jot for dinner. Go get it ready.

⌈Exit one⌉

(To Kent) How now, what art thou?

KENT A man, sir.

LEAR What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?

KENT I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgement, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.

LEAR What art thou?

KENT A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

LEAR If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a king, thou’rt poor enough. What wouldst thou?

KENT Service.

LEAR Who wouldst thou serve?

KENT You.

LEAR Dost thou know me, fellow?

KENT No, sir, but you have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.

LEAR What’s that?

KENT Authority.

LEAR What services canst do?

KENT I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which ordinary men are fit for I am qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.

LEAR How old art thou?

KENT Not so young to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.

LEAR Follow me. Thou shalt serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner. I will not part from thee yet.—Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave, my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

⌈Exit one⌉

Enter Oswald the steward





You, sirrah, where’s my daughter?

OSWALD So please you—

Exit

LEAR What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.

Exeunt Servant ⌈and Kent⌉

Where’s my fool? Ho, I think the world’s asleep.

Enter the Earl of Kent ⌈and a Servant⌉





How now, where’s that mongrel?

KENT He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.

LEAR Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?

SERVANT Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner he would not.

LEAR A would not?

SERVANT My lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgement your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont. There’s a great abatement appears as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also, and your daughter.

LEAR Ha, sayst thou so?

SERVANT I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.

LEAR Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception. I have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence and purport of unkindness. I will look further into’t. But where’s this fool? I have not seen him these two days.

SERVANT Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much pined away.

LEAR No more of that, I have noted it. Go you and tell my daughter I would speak with her. ⌈Exit one⌉ Go you, call hither my fool. ⌈Exit one⌉

Enter Oswald the steward ⌈crossing the stage⌉





O you, sir, you, sir, come you hither. Who am I, sir?

OSWALD My lady’s father.

LEAR My lady’s father? My lord’s knave, you whoreson dog, you slave, you cur!

OSWALD I am none of this, my lord, I beseech you pardon me.

LEAR Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?

⌈Lear strikes him⌉





OSWALD I’ll not be struck, my lord—

KENT (tripping him) Nor tripped neither, you base football player.

LEAR (to Kent) I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv’st me, and I’ll love thee.

KENT (to Oswald) Come, sir, I’ll teach you differences. Away, away. If you will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry; but away if you have wisdom.

Exit Oswald

LEAR Now, friendly knave, I thank thee.

Enter Lear’s Fool





There’s earnest of thy service.

He gives Kent money





FOOL Let me hire him, too. (To Kent) Here’s my coxcomb.

LEAR How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?

FOOL (to Kent) Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.

KENT Why, fool?

FOOL Why, for taking one’s part that’s out of favour. Nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch cold shortly. There, take my coxcomb. Why, this fellow hath banished two on’s daughters and done the third a blessing against his will. If thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. (To Lear) How now, nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters.

LEAR Why, my boy?

FOOL If I gave them my living I’d keep my coxcombs myself. There’s mine; beg another off thy daughters.

LEAR Take heed, sirrah—the whip.

FOOL Truth is a dog that must to kennel. He must be whipped out when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.

LEAR A pestilent gall to me!

FOOL ⌈to Kent⌉ Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.

LEAR Do.

FOOL Mark it, uncle.

Have more than thou showest,

Speak less than thou knowest,

Lend less than thou owest,

Ride more than thou goest,

Learn more than thou trowest,

Set less than thou throwest,

Leave thy drink and thy whore,

And keep in-a-door,

And thou shalt have more

Than two tens to a score.

LEAR This is nothing, fool.

FOOL Then, like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer, you gave me nothing for’t. Can you make no use of nothing, uncle?

LEAR Why no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.

FOOL (to Kent) Prithee, tell him so much the rent of his land comes to. He will not believe a fool. 130

LEAR A bitter fool.

FOOL Dost know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool?

LEAR No, lad. Teach me.

FOOL ⌈sings⌉

That lord that counselled thee To give away thy land,

Come, place him here by me;

Do thou for him stand.

The sweet and bitter fool

Will presently appear,

The one in motley here,

The other found out there.





LEAR Dost thou call me fool, boy?

FOOL All thy other titles thou hast given away. That thou wast born with.

KENT (to Lear) This is not altogether fool, my lord.

FOOL No, faith; lords and great men will not let me. If I had a monopoly out, they would have part on’t, and ladies too, they will not let me have all the fool to myself—they’ll be snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I’ll give thee two crowns.

LEAR What two crowns shall they be?

FOOL Why, after I have cut the egg in the middle and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i‘th’ middle and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass o’th’ back o’er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.

⌈Sings ⌉

Fools had ne’er less wit in a year,

For wise men are grown foppish.

They know not how their wits do wear,

Their manners are so apish.





LEAR When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?

FOOL I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mother; for when thou gavest them the rod and puttest down thine own breeches,

⌈Sings⌉

Then they for sudden joy did weep, And I for sorrow sung,

That such a king should play bo-peep

And go the fools among.





Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie. I would fain learn to lie.





LEAR An you lie, we’ll have you whipped.

FOOL I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou wilt have me whipped for lying, and sometime I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind of thing than a fool; and yet I would not be thee, nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o’ both sides and left nothing in the middle.

Enter Gonoril





Here comes one of the parings.

LEAR

How now, daughter, what makes that frontlet on?

Methinks you are too much o’ late i’th’ frown.

FOOL Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frown. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better than thou art, now. I am a fool; thou art nothing. ⌈To Gonoril⌉ Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; so your face bids me, though you say nothing.

⌈Sings⌉

Mum, mum. He that keeps neither crust nor crumb,

Weary of all, shall want some.





That’s a shelled peascod.

GONORIL (to Lear)

Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,

But other of your insolent retinue

Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth

In rank and not-to-be-endured riots.

Sir, I had thought by making this well known unto

you

To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,

By what yourself too late have spoke and done,

That you protect this course, and put it on

By your allowance; which if you should, the fault

Would not scape censure, nor the redress sleep

Which in the tender of a wholesome weal

Might in their working do you that offence,

That else were shame, that then necessity

Must call discreet proceedings.

FOOL (to Lear) For, you trow, nuncle,

⌈Sings⌉

The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long

That it had it head bit off by it young;



so out went the candle, and we were left darkling.

LEAR (to Gonoril) Are you our daughter?

GONORIL

Come, sir, I would you would make use of that good

wisdom

Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away

These dispositions that of late transform you

From what you rightly are.

FOOL May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? ⌈Sings⌉ ‘Whoop, jug, I love thee!’

LEAR

Doth any here know me? Why, this is not Lear.

Doth Lear walk thus, speak thus? Where are his eyes?

Either his notion weakens, or his discernings

Are lethargied. Sleeping or waking, ha?

Sure, ’tis not so.

Who is it that can tell me who I am?

Lear’s shadow? I would learn that, for by the marks

Of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason

I should be false persuaded I had daughters.

FOOL Which they will make an obedient father.

LEAR (to Gonoril)

Your name, fair gentlewoman?

GONORIL Come, sir,

This admiration is much of the savour

Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you

Understand my purposes aright,

As you are old and reverend, should be wise.

Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,

Men so disordered, so debauched and bold

That this our court, infected with their manners,

Shows like a riotous inn, epicurism

And lust make more like to a tavern, or brothel,

Than a great palace. The shame itself doth speak

For instant remedy. Be thou desired,

By her that else will take the thing she begs,

A little to disquantity your train,

And the remainder that shall still depend

To be such men as may besort your age,

That know themselves and you.

LEAR Darkness and devils!

Saddle my horses, call my train together!—

⌈Exit one or more⌉

Degenerate bastard, I’ll not trouble thee.

Yet have I left a daughter.

GONORIL

You strike my people, and your disordered rabble

Make servants of their betters.

Enter the Duke of Albany





LEAR

We that too late repent‘s—O sir, are you come?

Is it your will that we—prepare my horses.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,

More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child

Than the sea-monster—(to Gonoril) detested kite, thou

liest.

My train are men of choice and rarest parts,

That all particulars of duty know,

And in the most exact regard support

The worships of their name. O most small fault,

How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show,

That, like an engine, wrenched my frame of nature

From the fixed place, drew from my heart all love,

And added to the gall! O Lear, Lear!

Beat at this gate that let thy folly in

And thy dear judgement out.—Go, go, my people!

ALBANY

My lord, I am guiltless as I am ignorant.

LEAR

It may be so, my lord. Hark, nature, hear:

Dear goddess, suspend thy purpose if

Thou didst intend to make this creature fruitful.

Into her womb convey sterility.

Dry up in her the organs of increase,

And from her derogate body never spring

A babe to honour her. If she must teem,

Create her child of spleen, that it may live

And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.

Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,

With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,

Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits

To laughter and contempt, that she may feel—

That she may feel

How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is

To have a thankless child.—Go, go, my people!

Exeunt Lear, ⌈Kent, Fool, and servants⌉

ALBANY

Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?

GONORIL

Never afflict yourself to know the cause,

But let his disposition have that scope

That dotage gives it.

Enter King Lear ⌈and his Fool⌉





LEAR

What, fifty of my followers at a clap?

Within a fortnight?

ALBANY What is the matter, sir?

LEAR

I’ll tell thee. (To Gonoril) Life and death! I am

ashamed

That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,

That these hot tears, that break from me perforce

And should make thee—worst blasts and fogs upon

thee!

Untented woundings of a father’s curse

Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,

Beweep this cause again I’ll pluck you out

And cast you, with the waters that you make,

To temper clay. Yea,

Is’t come to this? Yet have I left a daughter

Whom, I am sure, is kind and comfortable.

When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails

She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find

That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think

I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.

Exit

GONORIL Do you mark that, my lord?

ALBANY

I cannot be so partial, Gonoril,

To the great love I bear you—

GONORIL Come, sir, no more.—

You, more knave than fool, after your master!

FOOL Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry, and take the fool with thee.

A fox when one has caught her,

And such a daughter,

Should sure to the slaughter,

If my cap would buy a halter.

So, the fool follows after.

Exit

GONORIL What, Oswald, ho!

Enter Oswald





OSWALD Here, madam.

GONORIL

What, have you writ this letter to my sister?

OSWALD Yes, madam.

GONORIL

Take you some company, and away to horse.

Inform her full of my particular fears,

And thereto add such reasons of your own

As may compact it more. Get you gone,

And after, your retinue.

Exit Oswald

Now, my lord,

This milky gentleness and course of yours,

Though I dislike not, yet under pardon

You’re much more ataxed for want of wisdom

Than praised for harmful mildness.

ALBANY

How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.

Striving to better aught, we mar what’s well.

GONORIL Nay, then—

ALBANY Well, well, the event. Exeunt





Sc. 5 Enter King Lear, the Earl of Kent disguised, and Lear’s Fool



LEAR ⌈to Kent⌉ Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there before you.

KENT I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.

Exit

FOOL If a man’s brains were in his heels, were’t not in danger of kibes?

LEAR Ay, boy.

FOOL Then, I prithee, be merry: thy wit shall ne’er go slipshod.

LEAR Ha, ha, ha!

FOOL Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though she’s as like this as a crab is like an apple, yet I con what I can tell.

LEAR Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?

FOOL Why, to keep his eyes on either side ’s nose, that what a man cannot smell out, a may spy into.

LEAR I did her wrong.

FOOL Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?

LEAR No.

FOOL Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.

LEAR Why?

FOOL Why, to put his head in, not to give it away to his daughter and leave his horns without a case.

LEAR

I will forget my nature. So kind a father!

Be my horses ready?

FOOL Thy asses are gone about them. The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.

LEAR Because they are not eight.

FOOL Yes. Thou wouldst make a good fool.

LEAR

To take’t again perforce—monster ingratitude!

FOOL If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’d have thee beaten for being old before thy time.

LEAR How’s that?

FOOL Thou shouldst not have been old before thou hadst been wise.

LEAR

O, let me not be mad, sweet heaven!

I would not be mad.

Keep me in temper. I would not be mad.

Enter a Servant





Are the horses ready?

SERVANT Ready, my lord.

LEAR (to Fool) Come, boy. Exeunt Lear and Servant

FOOL

She that is maid now, and laughs at my departure,

Shall not be a maid long, except things be cut shorter.

Exit





Sc. 6 Enter Edmund the bastard, and Curan, meeting



EDMUND Save thee, Curan.

CURAN And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and his duchess will be here with him tonight.

EDMUND How comes that?

CURAN Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad?—I mean the whispered ones, for there are yet but ear-bussing arguments.

EDMUND Not. I pray you, what are they?

CURAN Have you heard of no likely wars towards twixt the two Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?

EDMUND Not a word.

CURAN You may then in time. Fare you well, sir.

Exit

EDMUND

The Duke be here tonight! The better, best.

This weaves itself perforce into my business.

⌈Enter Edgar at a window above⌉





My father hath set guard to take my brother,

And I have one thing of a queasy question

Which must ask briefness. Wit and fortune help!—

Brother, a word. Descend, brother, I say.

⌈Edgar climbs down





My father watches. O, fly this place.

Intelligence is given where you are hid.

You have now the good advantage of the night.

Have you not spoken ‘gainst the Duke of Cornwall

aught?

He’s coming hither now, in the night, i’th’ haste,

And Regan with him. Have you nothing said

Upon his party against the Duke of Albany?

Advise you—

EDGAR I am sure on’t, not a word.

EDMUND

I hear my father coming. Pardon me.

In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.

Seem to defend yourself. Now, quit you well.

(Calling) Yield, come before my father. Light here,

here!

(To Edgar) Fly, brother, fly! (Calling) Torches, torches!

(To Edgar) So, farewell.

Exit Edgar

Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion

Of my more fierce endeavour.

He wounds his arm





I have seen

Drunkards do more than this in sport. (Calling) Father,

father!

Stop, stop! Ho, help!

Enter the Duke of Gloucester ⌈and others⌉





GLOUCESTER Now, Edmund, where is the villain?

EDMUND

Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,

Warbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon

To stand ’s auspicious mistress.

GLOUCESTER But where is he?

EDMUND

Look, sir, I bleed.

GLOUCESTER Where is the villain, Edmund?

EDMUND

Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could—

GLOUCESTER

Pursue him, go after.

Exeunt others

By no means what?





EDMUND

Persuade me to the murder of your lordship,

But that I told him the revengive gods

’Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend,

Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond

The child was bound to the father. Sir, in fine,

Seeing how loathly opposite I stood

To his unnatural purpose, with fell motion,

With his prepared sword he charges home

My unprovided body, lanced mine arm;

But when he saw my best alarumed spirits

Bold in the quarrel’s rights, roused to the encounter,

Or whether ghasted by the noise I made

Or ⌈ ⌉ I know not,

But suddenly he fled.

GLOUCESTER Let him fly far,

Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,

And found, dispatch. The noble Duke my master,

My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.

By his authority I will proclaim it

That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,

Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;

He that conceals him, death.

EDMUND

When I dissuaded him from his intent

And found him pitched to do it, with curst speech

I threatened to discover him. He replied,

‘Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think

If I would stand against thee, could the reposure

Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee

Make thy words faithed? No, what I should deny—

As this I would, ay, though thou didst produce

My very character—I’d turn it all

To thy suggestion, plot, and damned pretence,

And thou must make a dullard of the world

If they not thought the profits of my death

Were very pregnant and potential spurs

To make thee seek it.’

GLOUCESTER Strong and fastened villain!

Would he deny his letter? I never got him.

Trumpets within





Hark, the Duke’s trumpets. I know not why he comes.

All ports I’ll bar. The villain shall not scape.

The Duke must grant me that; besides, his picture

I will send far and near, that all the kingdom

May have note of him—and of my land,

Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means

To make thee capable.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall and Regan





CORNWALL

How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,

Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

REGAN

If it be true, all vengeance comes too short

Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?

GLOUCESTER

Madam, my old heart is cracked, is cracked.

REGAN

What, did my father’s godson seek your life?

He whom my father named, your Edgar?

GLOUCESTER

Ay, lady, lady; shame would have it hid.

REGAN

Was he not companion with the riotous knights

That tend upon my father?

GLOUCESTER

I know not, madam. ’Tis too bad, too bad.

EDMUND Yes, madam, he was.

REGAN

No marvel, then, though he were ill affected.

’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,

To have the spoil and waste of his revenues.

I have this present evening from my sister

Been well informed of them, and with such cautions

That if they come to sojourn at my house

I’ll not be there.

CORNWALL Nor I, assure thee, Regan.

Edmund, I heard that you have shown your father

A childlike office.

EDMUND ’Twas my duty, sir.

GLOUCESTER (to Cornwall)

He did betray his practice, and received

This hurt you see striving to apprehend him.

CORNWALL

Is he pursued?

GLOUCESTER Ay, my good lord.

CORNWALL

If he be taken, he shall never more

Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose

How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,

Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant

So much commend itself, you shall be ours.

Natures of such deep trust we shall much need.

You we first seize on.

EDMUND I shall serve you truly,

However else.

GLOUCESTER (to Cornwall) For him I thank your grace.

CORNWALL

You know not why we came to visit you—

REGAN

This out-of-season threat’ning dark-eyed night-

Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,

Wherein we must have use of your advice.

Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,

Of differences which I least thought it fit

To answer from our home. The several messengers

From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,

Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow

Your needful counsel to our business,

Which craves the instant use.

GLOUCESTER I serve you, madam.

Your graces are right welcome.

Exeunt





Sc. 7 Enter the Earl of Kent, disguised, at one door, and Oswald the steward, at another door



OSWALD Good even to thee, friend. Art of the house?

KENT Ay.

OSWALD Where may we set our horses?

KENT I’th’ mire.

OSWALD Prithee, if thou love me, tell me.

KENT I love thee not.

OSWALD Why then, I care not for thee.

KENT If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold I would make thee care for me.

OSWALD Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.

KENT Fellow, I know thee.

OSWALD What dost thou know me for?

KENT A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking knave; a whoreson, glass-gazing, superfinical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch, whom I will beat into clamorous whining if thou deny the least syllable of the addition.

OSWALD What a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that’s neither known of thee nor knows thee!

KENT What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me! Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripped up thy heels before the King? Draw, you rogue; for though it be night, the moon shines.

⌈He draws his sword⌉





I’ll make a sop of the moonshine o’ you. Draw, you whoreson, cullionly barber-monger, draw!

OSWALD Away. I have nothing to do with thee.

KENT Draw, you rascal. You bring letters against the King, and take Vanity the puppet’s part against the royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I’ll so carbonado your shanks—draw, you rascal, come your ways!

OSWALD Help, ho, murder, help!

KENT Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave, strike!

OSWALD Help, ho, murder, help!

Enter Edmund the bastard with his rapier drawn, ⌈then⌉ the Duke of Gloucester, ⌈then⌉ the Duke of Cornwall and Regan the Duchess





EDMUND ⌈parting them⌉ How now, what’s the matter?

KENT With you, goodman boy. An you please come, I’ll flesh you. Come on, young master.

GLOUCESTER Weapons? Arms? What’s the matter here?

CORNWALL Keep peace, upon your lives. He dies that strikes again. What’s the matter?

REGAN The messengers from our sister and the King.

CORNWALL (to Kent and Oswald) What’s your difference? Speak.

OSWALD I am scarce in breath, my lord.

KENT No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour, you cowardly rascal. Nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.

CORNWALL Thou art a strange fellow—a tailor make a man?

KENT Ay, a tailor, sir. A stone-cutter or a painter could not have made him so ill though he had been but two hours at the trade.

GLOUCESTER Speak yet; how grew your quarrel?

OSWALD This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his grey beard—

KENT Thou whoreson Z, thou unnecessary letter—(to Cornwall) my lord, if you’ll give me leave I will tread this unboulted villain into mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. (To Oswald) Spare my grey beard, you wagtail?

CORNWALL

Peace, sir. You beastly knave, have you no reverence?

KENT

Yes, sir, but anger has a privilege.

CORNWALL Why art thou angry?

KENT

That such a slave as this should wear a sword,

That wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues

As these, like rats, oft bite those cords in twain

Which are too entrenched to unloose, smooth every

passion

That in the natures of their lords rebel,

Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods,

Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks

With every gale and vary of their masters,

Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.

(To Oswald) A plague upon your epileptic visage!

Smile you my speeches as I were a fool?

Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain

I’d send you cackling home to Camelot.

CORNWALL

What, art thou mad, old fellow?

GLOUCESTER ⌈to Kent⌉ How fell you out? Say that.

KENT

No contraries hold more antipathy

Than I and such a knave.

CORNWALL Why dost thou call him knave?

What’s his offence?

KENT His countenance likes me not.

CORNWALL

No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.

KENT

Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:

I have seen better faces in my time

Than stands on any shoulder that I see

Before me at this instant.

CORNWALL This is a fellow

Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect

A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb

Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he.

He must be plain, he must speak truth.

An they will take’t, so; if not, he’s plain.

These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness

Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends

Than twenty silly-ducking observants

That stretch their duties nicely.

KENT

Sir, in good sooth, or in sincere verity,

Under the allowance of your grand aspect,

Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire

In flickering Phoebus’ front—

CORNWALL What mean’st thou by this?

KENT To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to’t.

CORNWALL (to Oswald)

What’s the offence you gave him?

OSWALD I never gave him any.

It pleased the King his master very late

To strike at me upon his misconstruction,

When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,

Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed,

And put upon him such a deal of man that

That worthied him, got praises of the King

For him attempting who was self-subdued,

And in the fleshment of this dread exploit

Drew on me here again.

KENT None of these rogues and cowards

But Ajax is their fool.

CORNWALL ⌈calling⌉ Bring forth the stocks, ho!—

You stubborn, ancient knave, you reverend braggart,

We’ll teach you.

KENT I am too old to learn.

Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King,

On whose employments I was sent to you.

You should do small respect, show too bold malice

Against the grace and person of my master,

Stocking his messenger.

CORNWALL ⌈calling⌉ Fetch forth the stocks!—

As I have life and honour, there shall he sit till noon.

REGAN

Till noon?—till night, my lord, and all night too.

KENT

Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog

You could not use me so.

REGAN Sir, being his knave, I will.

⌈Stocks brought out⌉





CORNWALL

This is a fellow of the selfsame nature

Our sister speaks of.—Come, bring away the stocks.

GLOUCESTER

Let me beseech your grace not to do so.

His fault is much, and the good King his master

Will check him for’t. Your purposed low correction

Is such as basest and contemnèd wretches

For pilf’rings and most common trespasses

Are punished with. The King must take it ill

That he’s so slightly valued in his messenger,

Should have him thus restrained.

CORNWALL I’ll answer that.

REGAN

My sister may receive it much more worse

To have her gentlemen abused, assaulted,

For following her affairs. Put in his legs.

They put Kent in the stocks





Come, my good lord, away!

Exeunt all but Gloucester and Kent

GLOUCESTER

I am sorry for thee, friend. ’Tis the Duke’s pleasure,

Whose disposition, all the world well knows,

Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I’ll entreat for thee.

KENT

Pray you, do not, sir. I have watched and travelled

hard.

Some time I shall sleep out; the rest I’ll whistle.

A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels.

Give you good morrow.

GLOUCESTER

The Duke’s to blame in this; ’twill be ill took.

Exit

KENT

Good King, that must approve the common say:

Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st

To the warm sun.

⌈He takes out a letter⌉





Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,

That by thy comfortable beams I may

Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles

But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia,

Who hath now fortunately been informed

Of my obscured course, and shall find time

For this enormous state, seeking to give

Losses their remedies. All weary and overwatched,

Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold

This shameful lodging. Fortune, good night;

Smile; once more turn thy wheel.

He sleeps

Enter Edgar





EDGAR I heard myself proclaimed,

And by the happy hollow of a tree

Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place

That guard and most unusual vigilance

Does not attend my taking. While I may scape

I will preserve myself, and am bethought

To take the basest and most poorest shape

That ever penury in contempt of man

Brought near to beast. My face I’ll grime with filth,

Blanket my loins, elf all my hair with knots,

And with presented nakedness outface

The wind and persecution of the sky.

The country gives me proof and precedent

Of Bedlam beggars who with roaring voices

Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms

Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,

And with this horrible object from low farms,

Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes and mills

Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers

Enforce their charity. ‘Poor Tuelygod, Poor Tom!’

That’s something yet. Edgar I nothing am.

Exit

Enter King Lear, his Fool, and a Knight





LEAR

’Tis strange that they should so depart from home

And not send back my messenger.

KNIGHT As I learned,

The night before there was no purpose

Of his remove.

KENT (waking) Hail to thee, noble master.

LEAR

How! Mak’st thou this shame thy pastime?

FOOL Ha, ha, look, he wears cruel garters! Horses are tied by the heads, dogs and bears by th’ neck, monkeys by th’ loins, and men by th’ legs. When a man’s over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.

LEAR (to Kent)

What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook

To set thee here?

KENT It is both he and she:

Your son and daughter.

LEAR No.

KENT Yes.

LEAR No, I say.

KENT

I say yea.

LEAR No, no, they would not.

KENT Yes, they have.

LEAR

By Jupiter, I swear no. They durst not do‘t,

They would not, could not do’t. ’Tis worse than murder,

To do upon respect such violent outrage.

Resolve me with all modest haste which way

Thou mayst deserve or they propose this usage,

Coming from us.

KENT My lord, when at their home

I did commend your highness’ letters to them,

Ere I was risen from the place that showed

My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post

Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth

From Gonoril, his mistress, salutations,

Delivered letters spite of intermission,

Which presently they read, on whose contents

They summoned up their meiny, straight took horse,

Commanded me to follow and attend

The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks;

And meeting here the other messenger,

Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine—

Being the very fellow that of late

Displayed so saucily against your highness—

Having more man than wit about me, drew.

He raised the house with loud and coward cries.

Your son and daughter found this trespass worth

This shame which here it suffers.

LEAR

O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!

Histerica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow;

Thy element’s betow.—Where is this daughter?

KENT

With the Earl, sir, within.

LEAR Follow me not; stay there.

Exit

KNIGHT (to Kent)

Made you no more offence than what you speak of?

KENT

No. How chance the King comes with so small a train?

FOOL An thou hadst been set in the stocks for that question, thou hadst well deserved it.

KENT Why, fool?

FOOL We’ll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there’s no labouring in the winter. All that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there’s not a nose among a hundred but can smell him that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following it; but the great one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.

⌈Sings⌉

That sir that serves for gain And follows but for form,

Will pack when it begin to rain,

And leave thee in the storm.





But I will tarry, the fool will stay,

And let the wise man fly.

The knave turns fool that runs away,

The fool no knave, pardie.



KENT Where learnt you this, fool?

FOOL Not in the stocks.

Enter King Lear and the Duke of Gloucester





LEAR

Deny to speak with me? They’re sick, they’re weary?

They travelled hard tonight?—mere insolence,

Ay, the images of revolt and flying off.

Fetch me a better answer.

GLOUCESTER My dear lord,

You know the fiery quality of the Duke,

How unremovable and fixed he is

In his own course.

LEAR Vengeance, death, plague, confusion! What ‘fiery quality’? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester, I’d Speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

GLOUCESTER Ay, my good lord.

LEAR

The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father

Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends

service.

‘Fiery’? The Duke?—tell the hot Duke that Lear—

No, but not yet. Maybe he is not well.

Infirmity doth still neglect all office

Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves

When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind

To suffer with the body. I’ll forbear,

And am fallen out with my more headier will,

To take the indisposed and sickly fit

For the sound man.—Death on my state,

Wherefore should he sit here? This act persuades me

That this remotion of the Duke and her

Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.

Tell the Duke and ’s wife I’ll speak with them,

Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,

Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum

Till it cry sleep to death.

GLOUCESTER I would have all well

Betwixt you.

Exit

LEAR O, my heart, my heart!

FOOL Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put ‘em i’th’ paste alive. She rapped ‘em o’th’ coxcombs with a stick, and cried ‘Down, wantons, down!’ ’Twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall and Regan, the Duke of Gloucester, and others





LEAR Good morrow to you both.

CORNWALL Hail to your grace.

⌈Kent here set at liberty⌉





REGAN I am glad to see your highness.

LEAR

Regan, I think you are. I know what reason

I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad

I would divorce me from thy mother’s shrine,

Sepulchring an adultress. (To Kent) Yea, are you free?

Some other time for that.—Belovèd Regan,

Thy sister is naught. O, Regan, she hath tied

Sharp-toothed unkindness like a vulture here.

I can scarce speak to thee. Thou’lt not believe

Of how deplored a quality—O, Regan!

REGAN

I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope

You less know how to value her desert

Than she to slack her duty.

LEAR My curses on her.

REGAN O sir, you are old.

Nature in you stands on the very verge

Of her confine. You should be ruled and led

By some discretion that discerns your state

Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray

That to our sister you do make return;

Say you have wronged her, sir.

LEAR Ask her forgiveness?

Do you mark how this becomes the house?

⌈Kneeling⌉ ‘Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.

Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg

That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.’

REGAN

Good sir, no more. These are unsightly tricks.

Return you to my sister.

LEAR ⌈rising⌉ No, Regan.

She hath abated me of half my train,

Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue

Most serpent-like upon the very heart.

All the stored vengeances of heaven fall

On her ungrateful top! Strike her young bones,

You taking airs, with lameness!

CORNWALL Fie, fie, sir.

LEAR

You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames

Into her scornful eyes. Infect her beauty,

You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the pow’rful sun

To fall and blast her pride.

REGAN O, the blest gods!

So will you wish on me when the rash mood—

LEAR

No, Regan. Thou shalt never have my curse.

Thy tender-hested nature shall not give

Thee o‘er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but thine

Do comfort and not burn. ’Tis not in thee

To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,

To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,

And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt

Against my coming in. Thou better know’st

The offices of nature, bond of childhood,

Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.

Thy half of the kingdom hast thou not forgot,

Wherein I thee endowed.

REGAN Good sir, to th’ purpose.

LEAR

Who put my man i’th’ stocks?

⌈Trumpets within⌉





CORNWALL What trumpet’s that?

Enter Oswald the steward





REGAN

I know’t, my sister’s. This approves her letters

That she would soon be here. (To Oswald) Is your lady

come?

LEAR

This is a slave whose easy-borrowed pride

Dwells in the fickle grace of her a follows.

He strikes Oswald⌉





Out, varlet, from my sight!

CORNWALL What means your grace?

Enter Gonoril





GONORIL

Who struck my servant? Regan, I have good hope

Thou didst not know on’t.

LEAR Who comes here? O heavens,

If you do love old men, if your sweet sway

Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,

Make it your cause! Send down and take my part.

(To Gonoril) Art not ashamed to look upon this

beard?

O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?

GONORIL

Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?

All’s not offence that indiscretion finds

And dotage terms so.

LEAR O sides, you are too tough!

Will you yet hold?—How came my man i’th’ stocks?

CORNWALL

I set him there, sir; but his own disorders

Deserved much less advancement.

LEAR You? Did you?

REGAN

I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.

If till the expiration of your month

You will return and sojourn with my sister,

Dismissing half your train, come then to me.

I am now from home, and out of that provision

Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

LEAR

Return to her, and fifty men dismissed?

No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose

To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,

To wage against the enmity of the air

Necessity’s sharp pinch. Return with her?

Why, the hot-blood in France that dowerless took

Our youngest born—I could as well be brought

To knee his throne and, squire-like, pension beg

To keep base life afoot. Return with her?

Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter

To this detested groom.

GONORIL At your choice, sir.

LEAR

Now I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.

I will not trouble thee, my child. Farewell.

We’ll no more meet, no more see one another.

But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter—

Or rather a disease that lies within my flesh,

Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,

A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle

In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee.

Let shame come when it will, I do not call it.

I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,

Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.

Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure.

I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,

I and my hundred knights.

REGAN Not altogether so, sir.

I look not for you yet, nor am provided

For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;

For those that mingle reason with your passion

Must be content to think you are old, and so—

But she knows what she does.

LEAR Is this well spoken now?

REGAN

I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?

Is it not well? What should you need of more,

Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger

Speaks ‘gainst so great a number? How in a house

Should many people under two commands

Hold amity? ’Tis hard, almost impossible.

GONORIL

Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance

From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

REGAN

Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,

We could control them. If you will come to me—

For now I spy a danger—I entreat you

To bring but five-and-twenty; to no more

Will I give place or notice.

LEAR I gave you all.

REGAN And in good time you gave it.

LEAR

Made you my guardians, my depositaries,

But kept a reservation to be followed

With such a number. What, must I come to you

With five-and-twenty, Regan? Said you so?

REGAN

And speak’t again, my lord. No more with me.

LEAR

Those wicked creatures yet do seem well favoured

When others are more wicked. Not being the worst

Stands in some rank of praise. (To Gonoril) I’ll go with

thee.

Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,

And thou art twice her love.

GONORIL Hear me, my lord.

What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,

To follow in a house where twice so many

Have a command to tend you?

REGAN What needs one?

LEAR

O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars

Are in the poorest thing superfluous.

Allow not nature more than nature needs,

Man’s life is cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady.

If only to go warm were gorgeous,

Why, nature needs not what thou, gorgeous, wearest,

Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But for true need—

You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need.

You see me here, you gods, a poor old fellow,

As full of grief as age, wretched in both.

If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts

Against their father, fool me not so much

To bear it tamely. Touch me with noble anger.

O, let not women’s weapons, water-drops,

Stain my man’s cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,

I will have such revenges on you both

That all the world shall—I will do such things—

What they are, yet I know not; but they shall be

The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep.

No, I’ll not weep.

⌈Storm within⌉





I have full cause of weeping, but this heart

Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws

Or ere I’ll weep.—O fool, I shall go mad!

Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, ⌈Knight,⌉ and Fool

CORNWALL

Let us withdraw. ’Twill be a storm.

REGAN

This house is little. The old man and his people

Cannot be well bestowed.

GONORIL ’Tis his own blame;

Hath put himself from rest, and must needs taste his folly.

REGAN

For his particular I’ll receive him gladly,

But not one follower.

CORNWALL

So am I purposed. Where is my lord of Gloucester?

REGAN

Followed the old man forth.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester





He is returned.

GLOUCESTER

The King is in high rage, and will I know not whither.

REGAN

’Tis good to give him way. He leads himself.

GONORIL (to Gloucester)

My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

GLOUCESTER

Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds

Do sorely rustle. For many miles about

There’s not a bush.

REGAN O sir, to wilful men

The injuries that they themselves procure

Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.

He is attended with a desperate train,

And what they may incense him to, being apt

To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.

CORNWALL

Shut up your doors, my lord. ‘Tis a wild night.

My Regan counsels well. Come out o’th’ storm. Exeunt





Sc. 8 Storm. Enter the Earl of Kent disguised, and First Gentleman, at several doors



KENT

What’s here, beside foul weather?

FIRST GENTLEMAN One minded like the weather,

Most unquietly.

KENT I know you. Where’s the King?

FIRST GENTLEMAN

Contending with the fretful element;

Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea

Or swell the curled waters ’bove the main,

That things might change or cease; tears his white

hair,

Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,

Catch in their fury and make nothing of;

Strives in his little world of man to outstorm

The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.

This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,

The lion and the belly-pinched wolf

Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,

And bids what will take all.

KENT But who is with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN

None but the fool, who labours to outjest

His heart-struck injuries.

KENT Sir, I do know you,

And dare upon the warrant of my art

Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,

Although as yet the face of it be covered

With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall;

But true it is. From France there comes a power

Into this scattered kingdom, who already,

Wise in our negligence, have secret feet

In some of our best ports, and are at point

To show their open banner. Now to you:

If on my credit you dare build so far

To make your speed to Dover, you shall find

Some that will thank you, making just report

Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow

The King hath cause to plain.

I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,

And from some knowledge and assurance offer

This office to you.

FIRST GENTLEMAN I will talk farther with you.

KENT No, do not.

For confirmation that I am much more

Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take

What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia—

As fear not but you shall—show her this ring

And she will tell you who your fellow is,

That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!

I will go seek the King.

FIRST GENTLEMAN Give me your hand.

Have you no more to say?

KENT Few words, but to effect

More than all yet: that when we have found the King—

In which endeavour I’ll this way, you that—

He that first lights on him holla the other.

Exeunt severally





Sc. 9 Storm. Enter King Lear and his Fool



LEAR

Blow, wind, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow,

You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout

Till you have drenched the steeples, drowned the

cocks!

You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,

Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,

Singe my white head; and thou all-shaking thunder,

Smite flat the thick rotundity of the world,

Crack nature’s mould, all germens spill at once

That make ingrateful man.

FOOL O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rain-water out o’ door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters blessing. Here’s a night pities neither wise man nor fool.

LEAR

Rumble thy bellyful; spit, fire; spout, rain.

Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.

I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.

I never gave you kingdom, called you children.

You owe me no subscription. Why then, let fall

Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,

A poor, infirm, weak and despised old man,

But yet I call you servile ministers,

That have with two pernicious daughters joined

Your high engendered battle ‘gainst a head

So old and white as this. O, ’tis foul!

FOOL He that has a house to put his head in has a good headpiece.

⌈Sings⌉

The codpiece that will house Before the head has any,

The head and he shall louse,

So beggars marry many.





The man that makes his toe

What he his heart should make

Shall have a corn cry woe,

And turn his sleep to wake—



for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.

LEAR

No, I will be the pattern of all patience.

⌈He sits.⌉ Enter the Earl of Kent disguised





I will say nothing.

KENT Who’s there?

FOOL Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece—that’s a wise man and a fool.

KENT (to Lear)

Alas, sir, sit you here? Things that love night

Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies

Gallow the very wanderers of the dark

And makes them keep their caves. Since I was man

Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,

Such groans of roaring wind and rain I ne’er

Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry

The affliction nor the force.

LEAR Let the great gods,

That keep this dreadful pother o’er our heads,

Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch

That hast within thee undivulgèd crimes

Unwhipped of justice; hide thee, thou bloody hand,

Thou perjured and thou simular man of virtue

That art incestuous; caitiff, in pieces shake,

That under covert and convenient seeming

Hast practised on man’s life;

Close pent-up guilts, rive your concealed centres

And cry these dreadful summoners grace.

I am a man more sinned against than sinning.

KENT Alack, bare-headed?

Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.

Some friendship will it lend you ‘gainst the tempest.

Repose you there whilst I to this hard house-

More hard than is the stone whereof ’tis raised,

Which even but now, demanding after you,

Denied me to come in—return and force

Their scanted courtesy.

LEAR My wit begins to turn.

(To Fool) Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art

cold?

I am cold myself.—Where is this straw, my fellow?

The art of our necessities is strange,

That can make vile things precious. Come, your

hovel.—

Poor fool and knave, I have one part of my heart

That sorrows yet for thee.

FOOL ⌈sings⌉

He that has a little tiny wit,

With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain,

Must make content with his fortunes fit,

For the rain it raineth every day.





LEAR

True, my good boy. (To Kent) Come, bring us to this hovel. Exeunt





Sc. 10 Enter the Duke of Gloucester and Edmund the bastard, with lights



GLOUCESTER

Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this

Unnatural dealing. When I desired their leave

That I might pity him, they took from me

The use of mine own house, charged me on pain

Of their displeasure neither to speak of him,

Entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.

EDMUND Most savage and unnatural!

GLOUCESTER Go to, say you nothing. There’s a division betwixt the Dukes, and a worse matter than that. I have received a letter this night—‘tis dangerous to be spoken—I have locked the letter in my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged home. There’s part of a power already landed. We must incline to the King. I will seek him and privily relieve him. Go you and maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I die for’t—as no less is threatened me—the King my old master must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward. Edmund, pray you be careful. Exit

EDMUND

This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke

Instantly know, and of that letter too.

This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me

That which my father loses: no less than all.

The younger rises when the old do fall. Exit





Sc. 11 Storm. Enter King Lear, the Earl of Kent disguised, and Lear’s Fool



KENT

Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.

The tyranny of the open night’s too rough

For nature to endure.

LEAR Let me alone.

KENT

Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR Wilt break my heart?

KENT

I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.

LEAR

Thou think‘st ’tis much that this contentious storm

Invades us to the skin. So ‘tis to thee;

But where the greater malady is fixed,

The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear,

But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea

Thou‘dst meet the bear i’th’ mouth. When the mind’s

free,

The body’s delicate. This tempest in my mind

Doth from my senses take all feeling else

Save what beats there: filial ingratitude.

Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand

For lifting food to’t? But I will punish sure.

No, I will weep no more.—

In such a night as this! O Regan, Gonoril,

Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave you all—

O, that way madness lies. Let me shun that.

No more of that.

KENT Good my lord, enter.

LEAR

Prithee, go in thyself. Seek thy own ease.

This tempest will not give me leave to ponder

On things would hurt me more; but I’ll go in.

⌈Exit Fool⌉

Poor naked wretches, wheresoe‘er you are,

That bide the pelting of this pitiless night,

How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,

Your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you

From seasons such as these? O, I have ta’en

Too little care of this. Take physic, pomp,

Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,

That thou mayst shake the superflux to them

And show the heavens more just.

Enter Lear’s Fool





FOOL Come not in here, nuncle; here’s a spirit. Help me, help me!

KENT Give me thy hand. Who’s there?

FOOL A spirit. He says his name’s Poor Tom.

KENT

What art thou that dost grumble there in the straw?

Come forth.

⌈Enter Edgar as a Bedlam beggar⌉





EDGAR Away, the foul fiend follows me. Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.

LEAR

Hast thou given all to thy two daughters,

And art thou come to this?

EDGAR Who gives anything to Poor Tom, whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through ford and whirlypool, o’er bog and quagmire; that has laid knives under his pillow and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his potage, made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five wits, Tom’s a-cold! Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking. Do Poor Tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him, now, and there, and there again.

LEAR

What, has his daughters brought him to this pass?

(To Edgar) Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give

them all?

FOOL Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

LEAR (to Edgar)

Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air

Hang fated o’er men’s faults fall on thy daughters!

KENT He hath no daughters, sir.

LEAR

Death, traitor! Nothing could have subdued nature

To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.

(To Edgar) Is it the fashion that discarded fathers

Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?

Judicious punishment: ’twas this flesh begot

Those pelican daughters.

EDGAR Pillicock sat on pillicock’s hill; a lo, lo, lo.

FOOL This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

EDGAR Take heed o’th’ foul fiend; obey thy parents; keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with man’s sworn spouse: set not thy sweet heart on proud array. Tom’s a-cold.

LEAR What hast thou been?

EDGAR A servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress’ heart, and did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it. Wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in woman out-paramoured the Turk. False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustlings of silks betray thy poor heart to women. Keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand out of placket, thy pen from lender’s book, and defy the foul fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind. Heigh no nonny. Dolphin, my boy, my boy! Cease, let him trot by.

LEAR Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more but this? Consider him well. Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Here’s three on ’s are sophisticated; thou art the thing itself. Unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings! Come on, be true.

FOOL Prithee, nuncle, be content. This is a naughty night to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher’s heart—a small spark, all the rest on ’s body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester with a ⌈torch⌉





EDGAR This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin, squinies the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature of earth.

⌈Sings⌉

Swithin footed thrice the wold,

A met the night mare and her nine foal;

Bid her alight

And her troth plight,

And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!





KENT (to Lear)

How fares your grace?

LEAR What’s he?

KENT (to Gloucester) Who’s there? What is’t you seek?

GLOUCESTER What are you there? Your names?

EDGAR Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cowdung for salads, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to tithing, and stock-punished, and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body,

Horse to ride, and weapon to wear.

But mice and rats and such small deer

Hath been Tom’s food for seven long year-

Beware my follower. Peace, Smolking; peace, thou

fiend!

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

What, hath your grace no better company?

EDGAR

The Prince of Darkness is a gentleman;

Modo he’s called, and Mahu—

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,

That it doth hate what gets it.

EDGAR Poor Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER (to Lear)

Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer

To obey in all your daughters’ hard commands.

Though their injunction be to bar my doors

And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,

Yet have I ventured to come seek you out

And bring you where both food and fire is ready.

LEAR

First let me talk with this philosopher.

(To Edgar) What is the cause of thunder?

KENT My good lord,

Take his offer; go into the house.

LEAR

I’ll talk a word with this most learnèd Theban.

(To Edgar) What is your study?

EDGAR

How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.

LEAR

Let me ask you one word in private.

They converse apart





KENT (to Gloucester)

Importune him to go, my lord.

His wits begin to unsettle.

GLOUCESTER Canst thou blame him?

His daughters seek his death. O, that good Kent,

He said it would be thus, poor banished man!

Thou sayst the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee, friend,

I am almost mad myself. I had a son,

Now outlawed from my blood; a sought my life

But lately, very late. I loved him, friend;

No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,

The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this!

(To Lear) I do beseech your grace—

LEAR O, cry you mercy.

(To Edgar) Noble philosopher, your company.

EDGAR Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER

In, fellow, there in t’hovel; keep thee warm.

LEAR

Come, let’s in all.

KENT This way, my lord.

LEAR With him!

I will keep still with my philosopher.

KENT (to Gloucester)

Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.

GLOUCESTER Take him you on.

KENT ⌈to Edgar⌉

Sirrah, come on. Go along with us.

LEAR (to Edgar)

Come, good Athenian.

GLOUCESTER No words, no words. Hush.

EDGAR Child Roland to the dark tower come, His word was still ‘Fie, fo, and fum; I smell the blood of a British man.’

Exeunt





Sc. 12 Enter the Duke of Cornwall and Edmund the bastard



CORNWALL I will have my revenge ere I depart the house. EDMUND How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of.

CORNWALL I now perceive it was not altogether your brother’s evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit set a-work by a reprovable badness in himself.

EDMUND How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens, that his treason were not, or not I the detector!

CORNWALL Go with me to the Duchess.

EDMUND If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.

CORNWALL True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.

EDMUND ⌈aside⌉ If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. (To Cornwall) I will persever in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.

CORNWALL I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love. Exeunt





Sc. 13 Enter the Duke of Gloucester and King Lear, the Earl of Kent disguised, Lear’s Fool, and Edgar as a Bedlam beggar



GLOUCESTER Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be long from you.

KENT All the power of his wits have given way to impatience; the gods discern your kindness! ⌈Exit Gloucester⌉

EDGAR Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness. Pray, innocent; beware the foul fiend.

FOOL (to Lear) Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman.

LEAR

A king, a king! To have a thousand With red burning spits come hissing in upon them!

EDGAR The foul fiend bites my back.

FOOL (to Lear) He’s mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse’s health, a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath.

LEAR

It shall be done. I will arraign them straight.

⌈To Edgar⌉ Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.

⌈To Fool⌉ Thou sapient sir, sit here.—No, you she-

foxes—

EDGAR Look where he stands and glares. Want’st thou eyes at troll-madam?

⌈Sings⌉ Come o’er the burn, Bessy, to me.

FOOL ⌈sings⌉

Her boat hath a leak,

And she must not speak

Why she dares not come over to thee.

EDGAR The foul fiend haunts Poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale. Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly for two white herring. Croak not, black angel: I have no food for thee.

KENT (to Lear)

How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed.

Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?

LEAR

I’ll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.

⌈To Edgar⌉ Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;

⌈To Fool⌉ And thou, his yokefellow of equity,

Bench by his side. ⌈To Kent⌉ You are o’th’

commission,

Sit you, too.

EDGAR Let us deal justly.

⌈Sings⌉

Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?

Thy sheep be in the corn,

And for one blast of thy minikin mouth

Thy sheep shall take no harm.

Purr, the cat is grey.

LEAR Arraign her first. ’Tis Gonoril. I here take my oath before this honourable assembly she kicked the poor King her father.

FOOL Come hither, mistress. Is your name Gonoril?

LEAR She cannot deny it.

FOOL Cry you mercy, I took you for a join-stool.

LEAR

And here’s another, whose warped looks proclaim

What store her heart is made on. Stop her there.

Arms, arms, sword, fire, corruption in the place!

False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?

EDGAR Bless thy five wits.

KENT (to Lear)

O pity! Sir, where is the patience now

That you so oft have boasted to retain?

EDGAR (aside)

My tears begin to take his part so much

They’ll mar my counterfeiting.

LEAR The little dogs and all,

Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart—see, they bark at me.

EDGAR Tom will throw his head at them.—Avaunt, you curs!

Be thy mouth or black or white,

Tooth that poisons if it bite,

Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,

Hound or spaniel, brach or him,

Bobtail tyke or trundle-tail,

Tom will make them weep and wail;

For with throwing thus my head,

Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.

Loudla, doodla! Come, march to wakes and fairs

And market towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.

LEAR Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes this hardness? (To Edgar) You, sir, I entertain you for one of my hundred, only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You’ll say they are Persian attire; but let them be changed.

KENT

Now, good my lord, lie here a while.

LEAR Make no noise, make no noise. Draw the curtains.

So, so, so. We’ll go to supper i’th’ morning. So, so, so.

He sleeps. Enter the Duke of Gloucester





GLOUCESTER (to Kent)

Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?

KENT

Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.

GLOUCESTER

Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.

I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him.

There is a litter ready. Lay him in’t

And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet

Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.

If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,

With thine and all that offer to defend him,

Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,

And follow me, that will to some provision

Give thee quick conduct.

KENT (to Lear) Oppressed nature sleeps.

This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews

Which, if convenience will not allow,

Stand in hard cure. (To Fool) Come, help to bear thy

master.

Thou must not stay behind.

GLOUCESTER Come, come away.

Exeunt all but Edgar

EDGAR

When we our betters see bearing our woes,

We scarcely think our miseries our foes.

Who alone suffers, suffers most i‘th’ mind,

Leaving free things and happy shows behind.

But then the mind much sufferance doth o’erskip

When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.

How light and portable my pain seems now,

When that which makes me bend, makes the King

bow.

He childed as I fathered. Tom, away.

Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray

When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile thee,

In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.

What will hap more tonight, safe scape the King!

Lurk, lurk.

Exit





Sc. 14 Enter the Duke of Cornwall and Regan, and Gonoril and Edmund the bastard, and Servants



CORNWALL (to Gonoril)

Post speedily to my lord your husband.

Show him this letter. The army of France is landed.

(To Servants) Seek out the villain Gloucester.

Exeunt some

REGAN

Hang him instantly.

GONORIL

Pluck out his eyes.

CORNWALL Leave him to my displeasure.—

Edmund, keep you our sister company.

The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous

father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke

where you are going, to a most festinate preparation;

we are bound to the like. Our posts shall be swift, and

intelligence betwixt us.—

Farewell, dear sister. Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

Enter Oswald the steward





How now, where’s the King?

OSWALD

My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.

Some five- or six-and-thirty of his knights,

Hot questants after him, met him at gate,

Who, with some other of the lord’s dependants,

Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast

To have well-armed friends.

CORNWALL Get horses for your mistress. Exit Oswald

GONORIL Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

CORNWALL

Edmund, farewell. Exeunt Gonoril and Edmund

(To Servants) Go seek the traitor Gloucester.

Pinion him like a thief; bring him before us.

Exeunt other Servants





Though we may not pass upon his life

Without the form of justice, yet our power

Shall do a curtsy to our wrath, which men

May blame but not control. Who’s there—the traitor?

Enter the Duke of Gloucester brought in by two or

three

REGAN

Ingrateful fox, ’tis he.

CORNWALL (to Servants) Bind fast his corky arms.

GLOUCESTER

What means your graces? Good my friends, consider

You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.

CORNWALL (to Servants)

Bind him, I say—

REGAN Hard, hard! O filthy traitor!

GLOUCESTER

Unmerciful lady as you are, I am true.

CORNWALL (to Servants)

To this chair bind him. (To Gloucester) Villain, thou

shalt find—

Regan plucks Gloucester’s beard





GLOUCESTER

By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done,

To pluck me by the beard.

REGAN So white, and such a traitor!

GLOUCESTER Naughty lady,

These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin

Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host.

With robbers’ hands my hospitable favours

You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

CORNWALL

Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?

REGAN

Be simple, answerer, for we know the truth.

CORNWALL

And what confederacy have you with the traitors

Late footed in the kingdom?

REGAN To whose hands

You have sent the lunatic King. Speak.

GLOUCESTER

I have a letter guessingly set down,

Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,

And not from one opposed.

CORNWALL Cunning.

REGAN And false.

CORNWALL

Where hast thou sent the King?

GLOUCESTER To Dover.

REGAN

Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril—

CORNWALL

Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.

GLOUCESTER

I am tied to th’ stake, and I must stand the course.

REGAN Wherefore to Dover, sir?

GLOUCESTER

Because I would not see thy cruel nails

Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister

In his anointed flesh rash boarish fangs.

The sea, with such a storm as his bowed head

In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up

And quenched the stellèd fires. Yet, poor old heart,

He holped the heavens to rage.

If wolves had at thy gate howled that dern time,

Thou shouldst have said ‘Good porter, turn the key;

All cruels I’ll subscribe.’ But I shall see

The winged vengeance overtake such children.

CORNWALL

See’t shalt thou never.—Fellows, hold the chair.—

Upon those eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.

GLOUCESTER

He that will think to live till he be old

Give me some help!—O cruel! O ye gods!

⌈Cornwall pulls out one of Gloucester’s eyes and

stamps on it⌉





REGAN (to Cornwall)

One side will mock another; t’other, too.

CORNWALL (to Gloucester)

If you see vengeance—

SERVANT Hold your hand, my lord.

I have served you ever since I was a child,

But better service have I never done you

Than now to bid you hold.

REGAN How now, you dog!

SERVANT

If you did wear a beard upon your chin

I’d shake it on this quarrel. ⌈To Cornwall⌉ What do

you mean?

CORNWALL My villein!

SERVANT

Why then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

They draw and fight





REGAN ⌈to another Servant⌉

Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!

She takes a sword and runs at him behind

SERVANT (to Gloucester)

O, I am slain, my lord! Yet have you one eye left

To see some mischief on him.

⌈Regan stabs him again⌉





O! He dies

CORNWALL

Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!

He ⌈pulls out⌉ Gloucester’s other eye





Where is thy lustre now?

GLOUCESTER

All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Edmund?

Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature

To quite this horrid act.

REGAN Out, villain!

Thou call’st on him that hates thee. It was he

That made the overture of thy treasons to us,

Who is too good to pity thee.

GLOUCESTER

O, my follies! Then Edgar was abused.

Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!

REGAN (to Servants)

Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell

His way to Dover. (To Cornwall) How is’t, my lord?

How look you?

CORNWALL

I have received a hurt. Follow me, lady.

(To Servants) Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this

slave

Upon the dunghill.

Exit one or more with Gloucester

⌈and the body⌉

Regan, I bleed apace.





Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.

Exeunt Cornwall and Regan

SECOND SERVANT

I’ll never care what wickedness I do

If this man come to good.

THIRD SERVANT If she live long

And in the end meet the old course of death,

Women will all turn monsters.

SECOND SERVANT

Let’s follow the old Earl and get the bedlam

To lead him where he would. His roguish madness

Allows itself to anything.

THIRD SERVANT

Go thou. I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggs

To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!

Exeunt severally





Sc. 15 Enter Edgar as a Bedlam beggar



EDGAR

Yet better thus and known to be contemned

Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst,

The low’st and most dejected thing of fortune,

Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.

The lamentable change is from the best;

The worst returns to laughter.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester led by an Old Man





Who’s here? My father, parti-eyed? World, world, O

world!

But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,

Life would not yield to age.

⌈Edgar stands aside⌉





OLD MAN (to Gloucester) O my good lord,

I have been your tenant and your father’s tenant

This fourscore—

GLOUCESTER

Away, get thee away, good friend, be gone.

Thy comforts can do me no good at all;

Thee they may hurt.

OLD MAN

Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.

GLOUCESTER

I have no way, and therefore want no eyes.

I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen

Our means secure us, and our mere defects

Prove our commodities. Ah dear son Edgar,

The food of thy abused father’s wrath—

Might I but live to see thee in my touch

I’d say I had eyes again.

OLD MAN How now? Who’s there?

EDGAR (aside)

O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at the worst?

I am worse than e’er I was.

OLD MAN ’Tis poor mad Tom.

EDGAR (aside)

And worse I may be yet. The worst is not

As long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’

OLD MAN (to Edgar) Fellow, where goest?

GLOUCESTER Is it a beggarman?

OLD MAN Madman and beggar too.

GLOUCESTER

A has some reason, else he could not beg.

In the last night’s storm I such a fellow saw,

Which made me think a man a worm. My son

Came then into my mind, and yet my mind

Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more

since.

As flies to wanton boys are we to th’ gods;

They kill us for their sport.

EDGAR (aside) How should this be?

Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,

Ang’ring itself and others.

⌈He comes forward⌉





Bless thee, master.

GLOUCESTER

Is that the naked fellow?

OLD MAN Ay, my lord.

GLOUCESTER

Then prithee, get thee gone. If for my sake

Thou wilt o‘ertake us hence a mile or twain

I’th’ way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,

And bring some covering for this naked soul,

Who I’ll entreat to lead me.

OLD MAN Alack, sir, he is mad.

GLOUCESTER

’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.

Do as I bid thee; or rather do thy pleasure.

Above the rest, be gone.

OLD MAN

I’ll bring him the best ’parel that I have,

Come on’t what will. Exit

GLOUCESTER Sirrah, naked fellow!

EDGAR

Poor Tom’s a-cold. I cannot dance it farther.

GLOUCESTER Come hither, fellow.

EDGAR Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

GLOUCESTER Know’st thou the way to Dover?

EDGAR Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, goodman, from the foul fiend. Five fiends have been in Poor Tom at once, as Obidicut of lust, Hobbididence prince of dumbness, Mahu of stealing, Modo of murder, Flibbertigibbet of mocking and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting-women. So bless thee, master.

GLOUCESTER

Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’ plagues

Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched

Makes thee the happier. Heavens deal so still.

Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man

That stands your ordinance, that will not see

Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly.

So distribution should undo excess,

And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

EDGAR Ay, master.

GLOUCESTER

There is a cliff whose high and bending head

Looks saucily in the confined deep.

Bring me but to the very brim of it

And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear

With something rich about me. From that place

I shall no leading need.

EDGAR Give me thy arm.

Poor Tom shall lead thee.

Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





Sc. 16 Enter ⌈at one door⌉ Gonoril and Edmund the bastard



GONORIL

Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband

Not met us on the way.

Enter ⌈at another door⌉ Oswald the steward

Now, where’s your master?

OSWALD

Madam, within; but never man so changed.

I told him of the army that was landed;

He smiled at it. I told him you were coming;

His answer was ‘The worse.’ Of Gloucester’s treachery

And of the loyal service of his son

When I informed him, then he called me sot,

And told me I had turned the wrong side out.

What he should most defy seems pleasant to him;

What like, offensive.

GONORIL (to Edmund) Then shall you go no further.

It is the cowish terror of his spirit

That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs

Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way

May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.

Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.

I must change arms at home, and give the distaff

Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant

Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear,

If you dare venture in your own behalf,

A mistress’s command. Wear this. Spare speech.

Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,

Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.

⌈she kisses him⌉





Conceive, and fare you well.

EDMUND Yours in the ranks of death.

GONORIL My most dear Gloucester.

⌈Exit Edmund⌉

To thee a woman’s services are due;

My foot usurps my body.

OSWALD Madam, here comes my lord.

Exit

Enter the Duke of Albany





GONORIL

I have been worth the whistling.

ALBANY O Gonoril,

You are not worth the dust which the rude wind

Blows in your face. I fear your disposition.

That nature which contemns it origin

Cannot be bordered certain in itself.

She that herself will sliver and disbranch

From her material sap perforce must wither,

And come to deadly use.

GONORIL No more. The text is foolish.

ALBANY

Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;

Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?

Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?

A father, and a gracious, aged man,

Whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would

lick,

Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.

Could my good-brother suffer you to do it—

A man, a prince by him so benefacted?

If that the heavens do not their visible spirits

Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,

It will come,

Humanity must perforce prey on itself,

Like monsters of the deep.

GONORIL Milk-livered man,

That bear‘st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;

Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning

Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know’st

Fools do those villains pity who are punished

Ere they have done their mischief: where’s thy drum?

France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,

With plumed helm thy flaxen biggin threats,

Whiles thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries

‘Alack, why does he so?’

ALBANY See thyself, devil.

Proper deformity shows not in the fiend

So horrid as in woman.

GONORIL O vain fool! 60

ALBANY

Thou changed and self-covered thing, for shame

Bemonster not thy feature. Were’t my fitness

To let these hands obey my blood,

They are apt enough to dislocate and tear

Thy flesh and bones. Howe’er thou art a fiend,

A woman’s shape doth shield thee.

GONORIL Marry your manhood, mew—

Enter ⌈Second⌉ Gentleman





ALBANY What news?

⌈SECOND⌉ GENTLEMAN

O my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead,

Slain by his servant going to put out

The other eye of Gloucester.

ALBANY Gloucester’s eyes?

⌈FSECOND⌉ GENTLEMAN

A servant that he bred, thralled with remorse,

Opposed against the act, bending his sword

To his great master, who thereat enraged

Flew on him, and amongst them felled him dead,

But not without that harmful stroke which since

Hath plucked him after.

ALBANY This shows you are above,

You justicers, that these our nether crimes

So speedily can venge. But O, poor Gloucester!

Lost he his other eye?

⌈SECOND⌉ GENTLEMAN Both, both, my lord. 80

(To Gonoril) This letter, madam, craves a speedy

answer.

’Tis from your sister.

GONORIL (aside) One way I like this well;

But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,

May all the building on my fancy pluck

Upon my hateful life. Another way

The news is not so took.—I’ll read and answer. Exit

ALBANY

Where was his son when they did take his eyes?

⌈ECOND⌉GENTLEMAN

Come with my lady hither.

ALBANY He is not here.

⌈ECOND⌉GENTLEMAN

No, my good lord; I met him back again.

ALBANY Knows he the wickedness? 90

⌈ECOND⌉GENTLEMAN

Ay, my good lord; ’twas he informed against him,

And quit the house on purpose that their punishment

Might have the freer course.

ALBANY Gloucester, I live

To thank thee for the love thou showed’st the King,

And to revenge thy eyes.—Come hither, friend

Tell me what more thou knowest. Exeunt





Sc. 17 Enter the Earl of Kent disguised, and ⌈First⌉ Gentleman



KENT Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you no reason?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Something he left imperfect in the state

Which, since his coming forth, is thought of; which

Imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger

That his personal return was most required

And necessary.

KENT

Who hath he left behind him general?

⌈IRST⌉ NTLEMAN

The Maréchal of France, Monsieur la Far.

KENT Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of grief? II

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN

Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence,

And now and then an ample tear trilled down

Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen

Over her passion who, most rebel-like,

Sought to be king o’er her.

KENT O, then it moved her.

⌈IRST⌉GENTLEMAN

Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove

Who should express her goodliest. You have seen

Sunshine and rain at once; her smiles and tears

Were like, a better way. Those happy smilets

That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know

What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence

As pearls from diamonds dropped. In brief,

Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved

If all could so become it.

KENT Made she no verbal question?

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN

Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of ‘father’

Pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart,

Cried ‘Sisters, sisters, shame of ladies, sisters,

Kent, father, sisters, what, i‘th’ storm, i’th’ night,

Let piety not be believed!’ There she shook

The holy water from her heavenly eyes

And clamour mastered, then away she started

To deal with grief alone.

KENT It is the stars,

The stars above us govern our conditions,

Else one self mate and make could not beget

Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN No.

KENT

Was this before the King returned?

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN No, since.

KENT

Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear’s i’th’ town,

Who sometime in his better tune remembers

What we are come about, and by no means

Will yield to see his daughter.

⌈IRST⌉ NTLEMAN Why, good sir?

KENT

A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness,

That stripped her from his benediction, turned her

To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights

To his dog-hearted daughters—these things sting

His mind so venomously that burning shame

Detains him from Cordelia.

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN Alack, poor gentleman!

KENT

Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?

⌈IRST⌉ ENTLEMAN ’Tis so; they are afoot.

KENT

Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear,

And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause

Will in concealment wrap me up a while.

When I am known aright you shall not grieve

Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go

Along with me. Exeunt





Sc. 18 Enter Queen Cordelia, a Doctor, and others



CORDELIA

Alack, ’tis he! Why, he was met even now,

As mad as the racked sea, singing aloud,

Crowned with rank fumitor and furrow-weeds,

With burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,

Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow

In our sustaining corn. The centuries send forth.

Search every acre in the high-grown field,

And bring him to our eye.

⌈Exit one or more⌉

What can man’s wisdom

In the restoring his bereaved sense,

He that can help him

Take all my outward worth.

DOCTOR There is means, madam.

Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,

The which he lacks. That to provoke in him

Are many simples operative, whose power

Will close the eye of anguish.

CORDELIA All blest secrets,

All you unpublished virtues of the earth,

Spring with my tears, be aidant and remediate

In the good man’s distress!—Seek, seek for him,

Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life

That wants the means to lead it.

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER News, madam.

The British powers are marching hitherward.

CORDELIA

’Tis known before; our preparation stands

In expectation of them.—O dear father,

It is thy business that I go about;

Therefore great France

My mourning and important tears hath pitied.

No blown ambition doth our arms incite,

But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right.

Soon may I hear and see him! Exeunt





Sc. 19 Enter Regan and Oswald, Gonoril’s steward



REGAN

But are my brother’s powers set forth?

OSWALD Ay, madam.

REGAN

Himself in person?

OSWALD Madam, with much ado.

Your sister is the better soldier.

REGAN

Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?

OSWALD No, madam.

REGAN

What might import my sister’s letters to him?

OSWALD I know not, lady.

REGAN

Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.

It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,

To let him live. Where he arrives he moves

All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,

In pity of his misery, to dispatch

His ‘nighted life, moreover to descry

The strength o’th’ army.

OSWALD

I must needs after with my letters, madam.

REGAN

Our troop sets forth tomorrow. Stay with us.

The ways are dangerous.

OSWALD I may not, madam.

My lady charged my duty in this business.

REGAN

Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you

Transport her purposes by word? Belike—

Something, I know not what. I’ll love thee much:

Let me unseal the letter.

OSWALD Madam, I’d rather—

REGAN

I know your lady does not love her husband.

I am sure of that, and at her late being here

She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks

To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.

OSWALD I, madam?

REGAN

I speak in understanding, for I know’t.

Therefore I do advise you take this note.

My lord is dead. Edmund and I have talked,

And more convenient is he for my hand

Than for your lady’s. You may gather more.

If you do find him, pray you give him this,

And when your mistress hears thus much from you,

I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.

So, farewell.

If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,

Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

OSWALD

Would I could meet him, madam. I would show

What lady I do follow.

REGAN Fare thee well. Exeunt severally





Sc. 20 Enter Edgar disguised as a peasant, with a staff, guiding the blind Duke of Gloucester



GLOUCESTER

When shall we come to th’ top of that same hill?

EDGAR

You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.

GLOUCESTER

Methinks the ground is even.

EDGAR Horrible steep.

Hark, do you hear the sea?

GLOUCESTER No, truly.

EDGAR

Why, then your other senses grow imperfect

By your eyes’ anguish.

GLOUCESTER So may it be indeed.

Methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak’st

With better phrase and matter than thou didst.

EDGAR

You’re much deceived. In nothing am I changed

But in my garments.

GLOUCESTER Methinks you’re better spoken.

EDGAR

Come on, sir, here’s the place. Stand still. How fearful

And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low!

The crows and choughs that wing the midway air

Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down

Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!

Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.

The fishermen that walk upon the beach

Appear like mice, and yon tall anchoring barque

Diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy

Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge

That on the unnumbered idle pebble chafes

Cannot be heard, it’s so high. I’ll look no more,

Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight

Topple down headlong.

GLOUCESTER Set me where you stand.

EDGAR

Give me your hand. You are now within a foot

Of th’extreme verge. For all beneath the moon

Would I not leap upright.

GLOUCESTER Let go my hand.

Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel

Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods

Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off.

Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

EDGAR

Now fare you well, good sir.

He stands aside





GLOUCESTER With all my heart.

EDGAR (aside)

Why I do trifle thus with his despair

Is done to cure it.

GLOUCESTER O you mighty gods,

He kneels





This world I do renounce, and in your sights

Shake patiently my great affliction off!

If I could bear it longer, and not fall

To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,

My snuff and loathed part of nature should

Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O bless him!—

Now, fellow, fare thee well.

EDGAR Gone, sir. Farewell.

Gloucester falls forward





(Aside) And yet I know not how conceit may rob

The treasury of life, when life itself

Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,

By this had thought been past.—Ative or dead?

(To Gloucester) Ho you, sir; hear you, sir? Speak.

(Aside) Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.

(To Gloucester) What are you, sir?

GLOUCESTER Away, and let me die.

EDGAR

Hadst thou been aught but goss‘mer, feathers, air,

So many fathom down precipitating

Thou hadst shivered like an egg. But thou dost breathe,

Hast heavy substance, bleed’st not, speak’st, art sound.

Ten masts a-length make not the altitude

Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.

Thy life’s a miracle. Speak yet again.

GLOUCESTER But have I fallen, or no?

EDGAR

From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.

Look up a-height. The shrill-gorged lark so far

Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.

GLOUCESTER Alack, I have no eyes.

Is wretchedness deprived that benefit

To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort

When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage

And frustrate his proud will.

EDGAR Give me your arm.

Up. So, how now? Feel you your legs? You stand.

GLOUCESTER

Too well, too well.

EDGAR This is above all strangeness.

Upon the crown of the cliff what thing was that

Which parted from you?

GLOUCESTER A poor unfortunate beggar.

EDGAR

As I stood here below, methoughts his eyes

Were two full moons. A had a thousand noses,

Horns whelked and waved like the enridged sea.

It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,

Think that the clearest gods, who made their honours

Of men’s impossibilities, have preserved thee.

GLOUCESTER

I do remember now. Henceforth I’ll bear

Affliction till it do cry out itself

‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of,

I took it for a man. Often would it say

‘The fiend, the fiend!’ He led me to that place.

EDGAR

Bear free and patient thoughts.

Enter King Lear mad, ⌈crowned with weeds and flowers⌉





But who comes here?

The safer sense will ne’er accommodate

His master thus.

LEAR No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the King himself.

EDGAR O thou side-piercing sight!

LEAR Nature is above art in that respect. There’s your press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper. Draw me a clothier’s yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this toasted cheese will do it. There’s my gauntlet. I’ll prove it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird, in the air. Hal Give the word.

EDGAR Sweet marjoram.

LEAR Pass.

GLOUCESTER I know that voice.

LEAR Ha, Gonorill Ha, Regan! They flattered me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. To say ‘ay’ and ‘no’ to everything I said ‘ay’ and ‘no’ to was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found them, there I smelt them out. Go to, they are not men of their words. They told me I was everything; ’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

GLOUCESTER

The trick of that voice I do well remember.

Is’t not the King?

LEAR Ay, every inch a king.

⌈Gloucester kneels⌉

When I do stare, see how the subject quakes!

I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause?

Adultery? Thou shalt not die for adultery.

No, the wren goes to‘t, and the small gilded fly

Does lecher in my sight.

Let copulation thrive, for Gloucester’s bastard son

Was kinder to his father than my daughters

Got ’tween the lawful sheets. To‘t, luxury, pell-mell,

For I lack soldiers. Behold yon simp’ring dame,

Whose face between her forks presageth snow,

That minces virtue, and does shake the head

To hear of pleasure’s name:

The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to’t

With a more riotous appetite. Down from the waist

They’re centaurs, though women all above.

But to the girdle do the gods inherit;

Beneath is all the fiend’s. There’s hell, there’s

darkness,

There’s the sulphury pit, burning, scalding,

Stench, consummation. Fie, fie, fie; pah, pah!

Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary,

To sweeten my imagination.

There’s money for thee.

GLOUCESTER O, let me kiss that hand!

LEAR Here, wipe it first; it smells of mortality.

GLOUCESTER

O ruined piece of nature! This great world

Shall so wear out to naught. Do you know me?

LEAR I remember thy eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny on me?

No, do thy worst, blind Cupid, I’ll not love.

Read thou that challenge. Mark the penning of’t.

GLOUCESTER

Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.

EDGAR (aside)

I would not take this from report; it is,

And my heart breaks at it.

LEAR (to Gloucester) Read.

GLOUCESTER What—with the case of eyes?

LEAR O ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how this world goes.

GLOUCESTER I see it feelingly.

LEAR What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes; look with thy ears. See how yon justice rails upon yon simple thief. Hark in thy ear: handy-dandy, which is the thief, which is the justice? Thou hast seen a farmer’s dog bark at a beggar?

GLOUCESTER Ay, sir.

LEAR An the creature run from the cur, there thou mightst behold the great image of authority. A dog’s obeyed in office.

Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand.

Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back.

Thy blood as hotly lusts to use her in that kind

For which thou whip’st her. The usurer hangs the

cozener.

Through tattered rags small vices do appear;

Robes and furred gowns hides all. Get thee glass eyes,

And, like a scurvy politician, seem

To see the things thou dost not. No tears, now.

Pull off my boots. Harder, harder! So.

EDGAR (aside)

O, matter and impertinency mixed—

Reason in madness!

LEAR

If thou wilt weep my fortune, take my eyes.

I know thee well enough: thy name is Gloucester.

Thou must be patient. We came crying hither.

Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air

We wail and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark me.

GLOUCESTER Alack, alack, the day!

LEAR ⌈removing his crown of weeds⌉

When we are born, we cry that we are come

To this great stage of fools. This’ a good block.

It were a delicate stratagem to shoe

A troop of horse with felt; and when I have stole

upon

These son-in-laws, then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

Enter three Gentlemen





⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

O, here he is. Lay hands upon him, sirs.

(To Lear) Your most dear—

LEAR

No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am e’en

The natural fool of fortune. Use me well.

You shall have ransom. Let me have a surgeon;

I am cut to the brains.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN You shall have anything.

LEAR No seconds? All myself?

Why, this would make a man a man of salt,

To use his eyes for garden water-pots,

Ay, and laying autumn’s dust.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN Good sir—

LEAR

I will die bravely, like a bridegroom.

What, I will be jovial. Come, come,

I am a king, my masters, know you that?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

You are a royal one, and we obey you.

LEAR Then there’s life in’t. Nay, an you get it, you shall get it with running.

Exit running, pursued by two Gentlemen

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,

Past speaking in a king. Thou hast one daughter

Who redeems nature from the general curse

Which twain hath brought her to.

EDGAR Hail, gentle sir.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN Sir, speed you. What’s your will?

EDGAR

Do you hear aught of a battle toward?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Most sure and vulgar, everyone hears that

That can distinguish sense.

EDGAR But, by your favour,

How near’s the other army?

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Near and on speedy foot, the main; descriers

Stands on the hourly thoughts.

EDGAR I thank you, sir. That’s all.

⌈FIRST⌉ GENTLEMAN

Though that the Queen on special cause is here,

Her army is moved on.

EDGAR I thank you, sir. Exit Gentleman

GLOUCESTER

You ever gentle gods, take my breath from me.

Let not my worser spirit tempt me again

To die before you please.

EDGAR Well pray you, father.

GLOUCESTER Now, good sir, what are you?

EDGAR

A most poor man, made lame by fortune’s blows,

Who by the art of known and feeling sorrows

Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,

I’ll lead you to some biding.

GLOUCESTER ⌈rising⌉ Hearty thanks.

The bounty and the benison of heaven

To send thee boot to boot.

Enter Oswald the steward





OSWALD A proclaimed prize! Most happy!

That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh

To raise my fortunes. Thou most unhappy traitor,

Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out

That must destroy thee.

GLOUCESTER Now let thy friendly hand

Put strength enough to’t.

OSWALD (to Edgar) Wherefore, bold peasant,

Durst thou support a published traitor? Hence,

Lest the infection of his fortune take

Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

EDGAR ‘Chill not let go, sir, without ’cagion.

OSWALD Let go, slave, or thou diest.

EDGAR Good gentleman, go your gate. Let poor volk pass. An ‘chud have been swaggered out of my life, it would not have been so long by a vortnight. Nay, come not near the old man. Keep out, ’che vor’ ye, or I’ll try whether your costard or my baton be the harder; I’ll be plain with you.

OSWALD Out, dunghill!

They fight





EDGAR ’Chill pick your teeth, sir. Come, no matter for your foins.

⌈Edgar knocks him down⌉





OSWALD

Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.

If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,

And give the letters which thou find’st about me

To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out

Upon the British party. O untimely death! Death!

He dies

EDGAR

I know thee well—a serviceable villain,

As duteous to the vices of thy mistress

As badness would desire.

GLOUCESTER What, is he dead?

EDGAR Sit you down, father. Rest you.

Gloucester sits





Let’s see his pockets. These letters that he speaks of

May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorrow

He had no other deathsman. Let us see.

Leave, gentle wax; and manners, blame us not.

To know our enemies’ minds we’d rip their hearts;

Their papers is more lawful.

He reads a letter





‘Let your reciprocal vows be remembered. You have

many opportunities to cut him off. If your will want

not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is

nothing done if he return the conqueror; then am I

the prisoner, and his bed my jail, from the loathed

warmth whereof, deliver me, and supply the place for

your labour.

Your—wife, so I would say—your affectionate

servant, and for you her own for venture,

Gonoril.’

O indistinguished space of woman’s wit—

A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life,

And the exchange my brother!—Here in the sands

Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified

Of murderous lechers, and in the mature time

With this ungracious paper strike the sight

Of the death-practised Duke. For him ’tis well

That of thy death and business I can tell.

[Exit with the body]

GLOUCESTER

The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense,

That I stand up and have ingenious feeling

Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distraught;

So should my thoughts be fenced from my griefs,

And woes by wrong imaginations lose

The knowledge of themselves.

A drum afar off. [Enter Edgar]





EDGAR Give me your hand.

Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.

Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.

Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





Sc. 21 ⌈Soft music.⌉ Enter Queen Cordelia, and the Earl of Kent, disguised



CORDELIA O thou good Kent,

How shall I live and work to match thy goodness?

My life will be too short, and every measure fail me.

KENT

To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid.

All my reports go with the modest truth,

Nor more, nor clipped, but so.

CORDELIA Be better suited.

These weeds are memories of those worser hours.

I prithee put them off.

KENT Pardon me, dear madam.

Yet to be known shortens my made intent.

My boon I make it that you know me not

Till time and I think meet.

CORDELIA Then be’t so, my good lord.

[Enter the Doctor and First Gentleman]





How does the King?

DOCTOR Madam, sleeps still.

CORDELIA O you kind gods,

Cure this great breach in his abused nature;

The untuned and hurrying senses O wind up

Of this child-changed father!

DOCTOR So please your majesty

That we may wake the King? He hath slept long.

CORDELIA

Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed

I’th’ sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?

[FIRST GENTLEMAN]

Ay, madam. In the heaviness of his sleep

We put fresh garments on him.

[DOCTOR]

Good madam, be by when we do awake him.

I doubt not of his temperance.

CORDELIA Very well.

DOCTOR

Please you draw near. Louder the music there!

King Lear is [discovered] asleep





CORDELIA

O my dear father, restoration hang

Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss

Repair those violent harms that my two sisters

Have in thy reverence made!

KENT Kind and dear princess!

CORDELIA

Had you not been their father, these white flakes

Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face

To be exposed against the warring winds,

To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder

In the most terrible and nimble stroke

Of quick cross-lightning, to watch—poor perdu—

With this thin helm? Mine injurer’s mean‘st dog,

Though he had bit me, should have stood that night

Against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor father,

To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn

In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,

’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once

Had not concluded all! (To the Doctor) He wakes.

Speak to him.

DOCTOR Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.

CORDELIA (to Lear)

How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?

LEAR

You do me wrong to take me out o’th’ grave.

Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound

Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears

Do scald like molten lead.

CORDELIA Sir, know me.

LEAR

You’re a spirit, I know. Where did you die?

CORDELIA (to the Doctor) Still, still far wide!

DOCTOR

He’s scarce awake. Let him alone a while.

LEAR

Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?

I am mightily abused. I should e’en die with pity

To see another thus. I know not what to say.

I will not swear these are my hands. Let’s see:

I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured

Of my condition.

CORDELIA (kneeling) O look upon me, sir,

And hold your hands in benediction o’er me.

No, sir, you must not kneel.

LEAR Pray do not mock.

I am a very foolish, fond old man,

Fourscore and upward, and to deal plainly,

I fear I am not in my perfect mind.

Methinks I should know you, and know this man;

Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant

What place this is; and all the skill I have

Remembers not these garments; nor I know not

Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,

For as I am a man, I think this lady

To be my child, Cordelia.

CORDELIA And so I am.

LEAR

Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray, weep not.

If you have poison for me, I will drink it.

I know you do not love me; for your sisters

Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.

You have some cause; they have not.

CORDELIA No cause, no cause.

LEAR Am I in France?

KENT In your own kingdom, sir.

LEAR Do not abuse me.

DOCTOR

Be comforted, good madam. The great rage

You see is cured in him, and yet it is danger

To make him even o’er the time he has lost.

Desire him to go in; trouble him no more

Till further settling.

CORDELIA (to Lear) Will’t please your highness walk?

LEAR You must bear with me.

Pray now, forget and forgive. I am old

And foolish. Exeunt all but Kent and [First] Gentleman

[FIRST] GENTLEMAN Holds it true, sir, that the Duke Of Cornwall was so slain?

KENT Most certain, sir.

[FIRST] GENTLEMAN

Who is conductor of his people?

KENT As ’tis said,

The bastard son of Gloucester.

[FIRST] GENTLEMAN They say Edgar,

His banished son, is with the Earl of Kent

In Germany.

KENT Report is changeable.

’Tis time to look about. The powers of the kingdom 90

Approach apace.

[FIRST] GENTLEMAN The arbitrement is

Like to be bloody. Fare you well, sir. Exit

KENT

My point and period will be throughly wrought,

Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought. Exit





Sc. 22 Enter Edmund, Regan, and their powers



EDMUND

Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,

Or whether since he is advised by aught

To change the course. He’s full of abdication

And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.

Exit one or more

REGAN

Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.

EDMUND

’Tis to be doubted, madam.

REGAN Now, sweet lord,

You know the goodness I intend upon you.

Tell me but truly—but then speak the truth-

Do you not love my sister?

EDMUND Ay: honoured love.

REGAN

But have you never found my brother’s way

To the forfended place?

EDMUND That thought abuses you.

REGAN I am doubtful

That you have been conjunct and bosomed with her,

As far as we call hers.

EDMUND No, by mine honour, madam.

REGAN

I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,

Be not familiar with her.

EDMUND Fear me not.

She and the Duke her husband—

Enter the Duke of Albany and Gonoril with troops

GONORIL (aside)

I had rather lose the battle than that sister

Should loosen him and me.

ALBANY (to Regan)

Our very loving sister, well bemet,

For this I hear: the King is come to his daughter,

With others whom the rigour of our state

Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest

I never yet was valiant. For this business,

It touches us as France invades our land;

Yet bold’s the King, with others whom I fear.

Most just and heavy causes make oppose.

EDMUND

Sir, you speak nobly.

REGAN Why is this reasoned? 30

GONORIL

Combine together ’gainst the enemy;

For these domestic poor particulars

Are not to question here.

ALBANY

Let us then determine with the ensign of war

On our proceedings.

EDMUND I shall attend you

Presently at your tent. [Exit with his powers]

REGAN Sister, you’ll go with us?

GONORIL No.

REGAN

’Tis most convenient. Pray you go with us.

GONORIL [aside]

O ho, I know the riddle! (To Regan) I will go.

Enter Edgar disguised as a peasant

EDGAR (to Albany)

If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor, 40

Hear me one word.

ALBANY (to the others) I’ll overtake you.

Exeunt all but Albany and Edgar

Speak.

EDGAR

Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.

If you have victory, let the trumpet sound

For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,

I can produce a champion that will prove

What is avouchèd there. If you miscarry,

Your business of the world hath so an end.

Fortune love you—

ALBANY Stay till I have read the letter.

EDGAR I was forbid it. 50

When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,

And I’ll appear again.

ALBANY Why, fare thee well.

I will o’erlook the paper. Exit Edgar

Enter Edmund

EDMUND

The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers. 55

He [offers] Albany a paper

Here is the guess of their great strength and forces

By diligent discovery; but your haste

Is now urged on you.

ALBANY We will greet the time. Exit

EDMUND

To both these sisters have I sworn my love,

Each jealous of the other as the stung

Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?—

Both?—one?—or neither? Neither can be enjoyed

If both remain alive. To take the widow

Exasperates, makes mad, her sister Gonoril,

And hardly shall I carry out my side,

Her husband being alive. Now then, we’ll use

His countenance for the battle, which being done,

Let her that would be rid of him devise

His speedy taking off. As for his mercy

Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,

The battle done, and they within our power,

Shall never see his pardon; for my state

Stands on me to defend, not to debate. Exit





Sc. 23 Alarum. The powers of France pass over the stage ⌈led by⌉ Queen Cordelia with her father in her hand. Then enter Edgar disguised as a peasant, guiding the blind Duke of Gloucester



EDGAR

Here, father, take the shadow of this bush

For your good host; pray that the right may thrive.

If ever I return to you again

I’ll bring you comfort. Exit

GLOUCESTER Grace go with you, sir.

Alarum and retreat. Enter Edgar





EDGAR

Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away.

King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en.

Give me thy hand. Come on.

GLOUCESTER

No farther, sir. A man may rot even here.

EDGAR

What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure

Their going hence even as their coming hither.

Ripeness is all. Come on. Exit Edgar guiding Gloucester





Sc. 24 Enter Edmund with King Lear and Queen Cordelia prisoners, a Captain, and soldiers



EDMUND

Some officers take them away. Good guard

Until their greater pleasures best be known

That are to censure them.

CORDELIA (to Lear) We are not the first

Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.

For thee, oppressed King, am I cast down,

Myself could else outfrown false fortune’s frown.

Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

LEAR

No, no. Come, let’s away to prison.

We two alone will sing like birds i’th’ cage.

When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down

And ask of thee forgiveness; so we’ll live,

And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh

At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues

Talk of court news, and we’ll talk with them too—

Who loses and who wins, who’s in, who’s out,

And take upon ’s the mystery of things

As if we were God’s spies; and we’ll wear out

In a walled prison packs and sects of great ones

That ebb and flow by th’ moon.

EDMUND (to soldiers) Take them away.

LEAR (to Cordelia)

Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,

The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught

thee?

He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven

And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.

The goodyear shall devour ‘em, flesh and fell,

Ere they shall make us weep. We’ll see ’em starve

first. Come.

Exeunt all but Edmund and the Captain

EDMUND Come hither, captain. Hark.

Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison.

One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost

As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way

To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men

Are as the time is. To be tender-minded

Does not become a sword. Thy great employment

Will not bear question. Either say thou’lt do’t,

Or thrive by other means.

CAPTAIN I’ll do’t, my lord.

EDMUND

About it, and write ‘happy’ when thou hast done.

Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so

As I have set it down.

CAPTAIN I cannot draw a cart,

Nor eat dried oats. If it be man’s work, I’ll do’t. Exit Enter the Duke of Albany, the two ladies Gonoril and Regan, [another Captain,] and others

ALBANY (to Edmund)

Sir, you have showed today your valiant strain,

And fortune led you well. You have the captives

That were the opposites of this day’s strife.

We do require then of you, so to use them

As we shall find their merits and our safety

May equally determine.

EDMUND Sir, I thought it fit

To send the old and miserable King

To some retention and appointed guard,

Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,

To pluck the common bosom on his side

And turn our impressed lances in our eyes

Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,

My reason all the same, and they are ready

Tomorrow, or at further space, to appear

Where you shall hold your session. At this time

We sweat and bleed. The friend hath lost his friend,

And the best quarrels in the heat are cursed

By those that feel their sharpness.

The question of Cordelia and her father

Requires a fitter place.

ALBANY Sir, by your patience, I hold you but a subject of this war, Not as a brother.

REGAN That’s as we list to grace him.

Methinks our pleasure should have been demanded

Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,

Bore the commission of my place and person,

The which immediate may well stand up

And call itself your brother.

GONORIL Not so hot.

In his own grace he doth exalt himself

More than in your advancement.

REGAN In my right

By me invested, he compeers the best.

GONORIL

That were the most if he should husband you.

REGAN

Jesters do oft prove prophets.

GONORIL Holla, holla—

That eye that told you so looked but asquint.

REGAN

Lady, I am not well, else I should answer From a full-flowing stomach. (To Edmund) General, Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony. Witness the world that I create thee here My lord and master.

GONORIL Mean you to enjoy him, then?

ALBANY

The let-alone lies not in your good will.

EDMUND

Nor in thine, lord.

ALBANY Half-blooded fellow, yes.

EDMUND

Let the drum strike and prove my title good.

ALBANY

Stay yet, hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee

On capital treason, and in thine attaint

This gilded serpent. (To Regan) For your claim, fair

sister,

I bar it in the interest of my wife.

’Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,

And I, her husband, contradict the banns.

If you will marry, make your love to me.

My lady is bespoke.—Thou art armed, Gloucester.

If none appear to prove upon thy head

Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,

[He throws down a glove]





There is my pledge. I’ll prove it on thy heart,

Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less

Than I have here proclaimed thee.

REGAN Sick, O sick!

GONORIL (aside) If not, I’ll ne’er trust poison.

EDMUND (to Albany, [throwing down a glove])

There’s my exchange. What in the world he is

That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.

Call by thy trumpet. He that dares, approach;

On him, on you—who not?—I will maintain

My truth and honour firmly.

ALBANY A herald, ho!

EDMUND A herald, ho, a herald!

ALBANY

Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,

All levied in my name, have in my name

Took their discharge.

REGAN This sickness grows upon me.

ALBANY

She is not well. Convey her to my tent.

Exit one or more with Regan

[Enter a Herald and a trumpeter]





Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,

And read out this.

SECOND CAPTAIN Sound, trumpet!

Trumpeter sounds

HERALD (reads) ‘If any man of quality or degree in the host of the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he’s a manifold traitor, let him appear at the third sound of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.’

EDMUND Sound! (Trumpeter sounds) Again!

Enter Edgar, armed, at the third sound, a trumpeter before him





ALBANY (to the Herald)

Ask him his purposes, why he appears

Upon this call o’th’ trumpet.

HERALD (to Edgar) What are you?

Your name and quality, and why you answer

This present summons?

EDGAR O, know my name is lost,

By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.

Yet ere I move’t, where is the adversary

I come to cope withal?

ALBANY Which is that adversary?

EDGAR

What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?

EDMUND

Himself. What sayst thou to him?

EDGAR Draw thy sword,

That if my speech offend a noble heart

Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.

He draws his sword

Behold, it is the privilege of my tongue,

My oath, and my profession. I protest,

Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,

Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune,

Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor,

False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father,

Conspirant ‘gainst this high illustrious prince,

And from th’extremest upward of thy head

To the descent and dust beneath thy feet

A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou no,

This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent

To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,

Thou liest.

EDMUND In wisdom I should ask thy name,

But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,

And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,

My right of knighthood I disdain and spurn.

Here do I toss those treasons to thy head,

With the hell-hated lie o’erturn thy heart,

Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,

This sword of mine shall give them instant way

Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!

[Flourish.] They fight. Edmund is vanquished





[ALL]

Save him, save him!

GONORIL This is mere practice, Gloucester.

By the law of arms thou art not bound to answer

An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,

But cozened and beguiled.

ALBANY Stop your mouth, dame,

Or with this paper shall I stopple it.

Thou worse than anything, read thine own evil.

Nay, no tearing, lady. I perceive you know’t.

GONORIL

Say if I do, the laws are mine, not thine.

Who shall arraign me for’t?

ALBANY Most monstrous!

Know’st thou this paper?

GONORIL Ask me not what I know.

Exit

ALBANY

Go after her. She’s desperate. Govern her.

Exit one or more

EDMUND

What you have charged me with, that have I done,

And more, much more. The time will bring it out.

’Tis past, and so am I. (To Edgar) But what art thou,

That hast this fortune on me? If thou beest noble,

I do forgive thee.

EDGAR Let’s exchange charity.

I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund.

If more, the more ignobly thou hast wronged me.

[He takes off his helmet]





My name is Edgar, and thy father’s son.

The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices

Make instruments to scourge us.

The dark and vicious place where thee he got

Cost him his eyes.

EDMUND Thou hast spoken truth.

The wheel is come full circled. I am here.

ALBANY (to Edgar)

Methought thy very gait did prophesy

A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.

Let sorrow split my heart if I did ever hate

Thee or thy father.

EDGAR Worthy prince, I know’t.

ALBANY Where have you hid yourself?

How have you known the miseries of your father?

EDGAR

By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,

And when ‘tis told, O that my heart would burst!

The bloody proclamation to escape

That followed me so near—O, our lives’ sweetness,

That with the pain of death would hourly die

Rather than die at once!—taught me to shift

Into a madman’s rags, to assume a semblance

That very dogs disdained; and in this habit

Met I my father with his bleeding rings,

The precious stones new-lost; became his guide,

Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair;

Never—O father!—revealed myself unto him

Until some half hour past, when I was armed.

Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,

I asked his blessing, and from first to last

Told him my pilgrimage; but his flawed heart—

Alack, too weak the conflict to support—

’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,

Burst smilingly.

EDMUND This speech of yours hath moved me,

And shall perchance do good. But speak you on—

You look as you had something more to say.

ALBANY

If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,

For I am almost ready to dissolve,

Hearing of this.

EDGAR This would have seemed a period

To such as love not sorrow; but another

To amplify, too much would make much more,

And top extremity.

Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man

Who, having seen me in my worst estate,

Shunned my abhorred society; but then, finding

Who ’twas that so endured, with his strong arms

He fastened on my neck and bellowed out

As he’d burst heaven; threw him on my father,

Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him

That ever ear received, which in recounting

His grief grew puissant and the strings of life

Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,

And there I left him tranced.

ALBANY But who was this?

EDGAR

Kent, sir, the banished Kent, who in disguise

Followed his enemy king, and did him service

Improper for a slave.

Enter [Second] Gentleman with a bloody knife





FSECONDl GENTLEMEN Help, help!

ALBANY What kind of help?

What means that bloody knife?

⌈SECOND⌉ GENTLEMAN It’s hot, it smokes. It came even from the heart of—

ALBANY Who, man? Speak.

[SECOND] GENTLEMAN

Your lady, sir, your lady; and her sister

By her is poisonèd—she hath confessed it.

EDMUND

I was contracted to them both; all three

Now marry in an instant.

ALBANY

Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.

This justice of the heavens, that makes us tremble,

Touches us not with pity.

Enter Kent as himself





EDGAR Here comes Kent, sir.

ALBANY

O, ’tis he; the time will not allow

The compliment that very manners urges.

KENT I am come

To bid my king and master aye good night.

Is he not here?

ALBANY Great thing of us forgot!—

Speak, Edmund; where’s the King, and where’s

Cordelia?

The bodies of Gonoril and Regan are brought in





Seest thou this object, Kent?

KENT Alack, why thus?

EDMUND Yet Edmund was beloved.

The one the other poisoned for my sake,

And after slew herself.

ALBANY Even so.—Cover their faces.

EDMUND

I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,

Despite of my own nature. Quickly send,

Be brief in’t, to th’ castle; for my writ

Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.

Nay, send in time.

ALBANY Run, run, O run!

EDGAR

To who, my lord? Who hath the office? Send

Thy token of reprieve.

EDMUND

Well thought on! Take my sword. The captain,

Give it the captain.

ALBANY Haste thee for thy life.

Exit [Second Captain]

EDMUND

He hath commission from thy wife and me

To hang Cordelia in the prison, and

To lay the blame upon her own despair,

That she fordid herself.

ALBANY

The gods defend her!—Bear him hence a while.

Exeunt some with Edmund

Enter King Lear with Queen Cordelia in his arms,

[followed by the Second Captain]





LEAR

Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones.

Had I your tongues and eyes, I would use them so

That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone for ever.

I know when one is dead and when one lives.

She’s dead as earth.

[He lays her down]

Lend me a looking-glass.

If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,

Why, then she lives.

KENT Is this the promised end?

EDGAR

Or image of that horror?

ALBANY Fall and cease.

LEAR

This feather stirs. She lives. If it be so,

It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows

That ever I have felt.

KENT [kneeling] Ah, my good master!

LEAR

Prithee, away.

EDGAR w’Tis noble Kent, your friend.

LEAR

A plague upon you, murderous traitors all.

I might have saved her; now she’s gone for ever.—

Cordelia, Cordelia: stay a little. Ha?

What is’t thou sayst?—Her voice was ever soft,

Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in women.—

I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.

[SECOND] CAPTAIN

’Tis true, my lords, he did.

LEAR Did I not, fellow?

I have seen the day with my good biting falchion

I would have made them skip. I am old now,

And these same crosses spoil me. (To Kent) Who are you?

Mine eyes are not o’ the best, I’ll tell you straight.

KENT

If fortune bragged of two she loved or hated,

One of them we behold.

LEAR Are not you Kent?

KENT

The same, your servant Kent. Where is your servant

Caius?

LEAR

He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that.

He’ll strike, and quickly too. He’s dead and rotten.

KENT

No, my good lord, I am the very man—

LEAR I’ll see that straight.

KENT

That from your first of difference and decay

Have followed your sad steps.

LEAR You’re welcome hither.

KENT

Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark, and deadly.

Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,

And desperately are dead.

LEAR So think I, too.

ALBANY

He knows not what he sees; and vain it is

That we present us to him.

EDGAR

Very bootless.

Enter another Captain





[THIRD] CAPTAIN (to Albany)

Edmund is dead, my lord.

ALBANY That’s but a trifle here.—

You lords and noble friends, know our intent.

What comfort to this great decay may come

Shall be applied; for us, we will resign

During the life of this old majesty

To him our absolute power; (to Edgar and Kent) you

to your rights,

With boot and such addition as your honours

Have more than merited. All friends shall taste

The wages of their virtue, and all foes

The cup of their deservings.—O see, see!

LEAR

And my poor fool is hanged. No, no life.

Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,

And thou no breath at all? O, thou wilt come no more.

Never, never, never.—Pray you, undo

This button. Thank you, sir. O, O, O, O!

EDGAR He faints. (To Lear) My lord, my lord!

LEAR Break, heart, I prithee break.

EDGAR Look up, my lord.

KENT

Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass. He hates him

That would upon the rack of this tough world

Stretch him out longer.

[Lear dies]





EDGAR O, he is gone indeed.

KENT

The wonder is he hath endured so long.

He but usurped his life.

ALBANY (to attendants)

Bear them from hence. Our present business

Is to general woe. (To Kent and Edgar) Friends of my

soul, you twain

Rule in this kingdom, and the gored state sustain.

KENT

I have a journey, sir, shortly to go:

My master calls, and I must not say no.

ALBANY

The weight of this sad time we must obey,

Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.

The oldest have borne most. We that are young

Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

Exeunt carrying the bodies





