The Two Noble Kinsmen



Prologue Flourish. Enter Prologue

PROLOGUE

New plays and maidenheads are near akin:

Much followed both, for both much money giv’n

If they stand sound and well. And a good play,

Whose modest scenes blush on his marriage day

And shake to lose his honour, is like her

That after holy tie and first night’s stir

Yet still is modesty, and still retains

More of the maid to sight than husband’s pains.

We pray our play may be so, for I am sure

It has a noble breeder and a pure,

A learned, and a poet never went

More famous yet ‘twixt Po and silver Trent.

Chaucer, of all admired, the story gives:

There constant to eternity it lives.

If we let fall the nobleness of this

And the first sound this child hear be a hiss,

How will it shake the bones of that good man,

And make him cry from under ground, 'O fan

From me the witless chaff of such a writer,

That blasts my bays and my famed works makes

lighter

Than Robin Hood’? This is the fear we bring,

For to say truth, it were an endless thing

And too ambitious to aspire to him,

Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim

In this deep water. Do but you hold out

Your helping hands and we shall tack about

And something do to save us. You shall hear

Scenes, though below his art, may yet appear

Worth two hours’ travail. To his bones, sweet sleep;

Content to you. If this play do not keep

A little dull time from us, we perceive

Our losses fall so thick we must needs leave.

Flourish. Exit





1.1 Music. Enter Hymen with a torch burning, a Boy in a white robe before, singing and strewing flowers. After Hymen, a nymph encompassed in her tresses, bearing a wheaten garland. Then Theseus between two other nymphs with wheaten chaplets on their heads. Then Hippolyta, the bride, led by Pirithous and another holding a garland over her head, her tresses likewise hanging. After her, Emilia holding up her train. Then Artesius ⌈and other attendants⌉



BOY (sings during procession)

Roses, their sharp spines being gone,

Not royal in their smells alone,

But in their hue;

Maiden pinks, of odour faint,

Daisies smell-less, yet most quaint,

And sweet thyme true;

Primrose, first-born child of Ver,

Merry springtime’s harbinger,

With harebells dim;

Oxlips, in their cradles growing,

Marigolds, on deathbeds blowing,

Lark’s-heels trim;

All dear nature’s children sweet,

Lie fore bride and bridegroom’s feet,



He strews flowers





Blessing their sense.

Not an angel of the air,

Bird melodious, or bird fair,

Is absent hence.

The crow, the sland’rous cuckoo, nor

The boding raven, nor chough hoar,

Nor chatt’ring pie,

May on our bridehouse perch or sing,

Or with them any discord bring,

But from it fly.





Enter three Queens in black, with veils stained, with imperial crowns. The First Queen falls down at the foot of Theseus; the Second falls down at the foot of Hippolyta; the Third, before Emilia

FIRST QUEEN (to Theseus)

For pity’s sake and true gentility’s,

Hear and respect me.

SECOND QUEEN (to Hippolyta)

For your mother’s sake, And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,

Hear and respect me.

THIRD QUEEN (to Emilia)

Now for the love of him whom Jove hath marked

The honour of your bed, and for the sake

Of clear virginity, be advocate

For us and our distresses. This good deed

Shall raze you out o’th’ Book of Trespasses

All you are set down there.

THESEUS (to First Queen)

Sad lady, rise.

HIPPOLYTA (to Second Queen) Stand up.

EMILIA (to Third Queen)

No knees to me. What woman I may stead that is distressed

Does bind me to her.

THESEUS (to First Queen)

What’s your request? Deliver you for all.

FIRST QUEEN ⌈kneeling still⌉

We are three queens whose sovereigns fell before

The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured

The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,

And pecks of crows in the foul fields of Thebes.

He will not suffer us to burn their bones,

To urn their ashes, nor to take th‘offence

Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye

Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds

With stench of our slain lords. O pity, Duke!

Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared sword

That does good turns to’th’ world; give us the bones

Of our dead kings that we may chapel them;

And of thy boundless goodness take some note

That for our crowned heads we have no roof,

Save this, which is the lion’s and the bear’s,

And vault to everything.

THESEUS

Pray you, kneel not: I was transported with your speech, and suffered

Your knees to wrong themselves. I have heard the

fortunes

Of your dead lords, which gives me such lamenting

As wakes my vengeance and revenge for ’em.

King Capaneus was your lord: the day

That he should marry you—at such a season

As now it is with me—I met your groom

By Mars’s altar. You were that time fair,

Not Juno’s mantle fairer than your tresses,

Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreath

Was then nor threshed nor blasted; fortune at you 6

Dimpled her cheek with smiles; Hercules our

kinsman—

Then weaker than your eyes—laid by his club.

He tumbled down upon his Nemean hide

And swore his sinews thawed. O grief and time,

Fearful consumers, you will all devour.

FIRST QUEEN ⌈kneeling still⌉

O, I hope some god, Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,

Whereto he’ll infuse power and press you forth

Our undertaker.

THESEUS

O no knees, none, widow:

⌈The First Queen rises⌉





Unto the helmeted Bellona use them

And pray for me, your soldier. Troubled I am.

He turns away





SECOND QUEEN ⌈kneeling still⌉

Honoured Hippolyta, Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain

The scythe-tusked boar, that with thy arm, as strong

As it is white, wast near to make the male

To thy sex captive, but that this, thy lord—

Born to uphold creation in that honour

First nature styled it in—shrunk thee into

The bound thou wast o‘erflowing, at once subduing

Thy force and thy affection; soldieress,

That equally canst poise sternness with pity,

Whom now I know hast much more power on him

Than ever he had on thee, who ow’st his strength,

And his love too, who is a servant for

The tenor of thy speech; dear glass of ladies,

Bid him that we, whom flaming war doth scorch,

Under the shadow of his sword may cool us.

Require him he advance it o‘er our heads.

Speak’t in a woman’s key, like such a woman

As any of us three. Weep ere you fail.

Lend us a knee:

But touch the ground for us no longer time

Than a dove’s motion when the head’s plucked off.

Tell him, if he i’th’ blood-sized field lay swoll’n,

Showing the sun his teeth, grinning at the moon,

What you would do.

HIPPOLYTA

Poor lady, say no more.

I had as lief trace this good action with you

As that whereto I am going, and never yet

Went I so willing way. My lord is taken

Heart-deep with your distress. Let him consider.

I’ll speak anon.

⌈The Second Queen rises⌉





THIRD QUEEN (kneeling ⌈still⌉ to Emilia)

O, my petition was

Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied

Melts into drops; so sorrow, wanting form,

Is pressed with deeper matter.

EMILIA

Pray stand up:

Your grief is written in your cheek.

THIRD QUEEN

O woe,

You cannot read it there; there, through my tears,

Like wrinkled pebbles in a glassy stream,

You may behold ’em.

⌈The Third Queen rises⌉





Lady, lady, alack—

He that will all the treasure know o’th’ earth

Must know the centre too; he that will fish

For my least minnow, let him lead his line

To catch one at my heart. O, pardon me:

Extremity, that sharpens sundry wits,

Makes me a fool.

EMILIA

Pray you, say nothing, pray you.

Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in’t,

Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were

The ground-piece of some painter, I would buy you

T’instruct me ’gainst a capital grief, indeed

Such heart-pierced demonstration; but, alas,

Being a natural sister of our sex,

Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me

That it shall make a counter-reflect ’gainst

My brother’s heart, and warm it to some pity,

Though it were made of stone. Pray have good

comfort.

THESEUS

Forward to th’ temple. Leave not out a jot

O’th’ sacred ceremony.

FIRST QUEEN

O, this celebration

Will longer last and be more costly than

Your suppliants’ war. Remember that your fame

Knolls in the ear o’th’ world: what you do quickly

Is not done rashly; your first thought is more

Than others’ laboured meditance; your premeditating

More than their actions. But, O Jove, your actions,

Soon as they move, as ospreys do the fish,

Subdue before they touch. Think, dear Duke, think

What beds our slain kings have.

SECOND QUEEN

What griefs our beds,

That our dear lords have none.

THIRD QUEEN

None fit for th’ dead.

Those that with cords, knives, drams, precipitance,

Weary of this world’s light, have to themselves

Been death’s most horrid agents, human grace

Affords them dust and shadow.

FIRST QUEEN

But our lords

Lie blist’ring fore the visitating sun,

And were good kings, when living.

THESEUS

It is true,

And I will give you comfort to give your dead lords

graves,

The which to do must make some work with Creon.

FIRST QUEEN

And that work presents itself to th’ doing.

Now ’twill take form, the heats are gone tomorrow.

Then, bootless toil must recompense itself

With its own sweat; now he’s secure,

Not dreams we stand before your puissance

Rinsing our holy begging in our eyes

To make petition clear.

SECOND QUEEN

Now you may take him,

Drunk with his victory.

THIRD QUEEN

And his army full

Of bread and sloth.

THESEUS

Artesius, that best knowest How to draw out, fit to this enterprise

The prim’st for this proceeding and the number

To carry such a business: forth and levy

Our worthiest instruments, whilst we dispatch

This grand act of our life, this daring deed

Of fate in wedlock.

FIRST QUEEN (to the other two Queens)

Dowagers, take hands;

Let us be widows to our woes; delay

Commends us to a famishing hope.

ALL THREE QUEENS

Farewell.

SECOND QUEEN

We come unseasonably, but when could grief

Cull forth, as unpanged judgement can, fitt’st time

For best solicitation?

THESEUS

Why, good ladies,

This is a service whereto I am going

Greater than any war—it more imports me

Than all the actions that I have foregone,

Or futurely can cope.

FIRST QUEEN

The more proclaiming

Our suit shall be neglected when her arms,

Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall

By warranting moonlight corslet thee! O when

Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall

Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think

Of rotten kings or blubbered queens? What care

For what thou feel’st not, what thou feel’st being able

To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou couch

But one night with her, every hour in’t will

Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and

Thou shalt remember nothing more than what

That banquet bids thee to.

HIPPOLYTA (to Theseus)

Though much unlike

You should be so transported, as much sorry

I should be such a suitor—yet I think

Did I not by th’abstaining of my joy,

Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit

That craves a present medicine, I should pluck

All ladies’ scandal on me. ⌈Kneels⌉ Therefore, sir,

As I shall here make trial of my prayers,

Either presuming them to have some force,

Or sentencing for aye their vigour dumb,

Prorogue this business we are going about, and hang

Your shield afore your heart—about that neck

Which is my fee, and which I freely lend

To do these poor queens service.

ALL THREE QUEENS (to Emilia)

O, help now,

Our cause cries for your knee.

EMILIA (kneels to Theseus)

If you grant not

My sister her petition in that force

With that celerity and nature which

She makes it in, from henceforth I’ll not dare

To ask you anything, nor be so hardy

Ever to take a husband.

THESEUS

Pray stand up.

⌈They rise⌉





I am entreating of myself to do

That which you kneel to have me.—Pirithous,

Lead on the bride: get you and pray the gods

For success and return; omit not anything

In the pretended celebration.—Queens,

Follow your soldier. (To Artesius) As before, hence you,

And at the banks of Aulis meet us with

The forces you can raise, where we shall find

The moiety of a number for a business

More bigger looked.

Exit Artesius

(To Hippolyta) Since that our theme is haste,

I stamp this kiss upon thy current lip—

Sweet, keep it as my token. (To the wedding party) Set

you forward,

For I will see you gone.

(To Emilia) Farewell, my beauteous sister.—Pirithous,

Keep the feast full: bate not an hour on’t.

PIRITHOUS

Sir,

I’ll follow you at heels. The feast’s solemnity

Shall want till your return.

THESEUS

Cousin, I charge you

Budge not from Athens. We shall be returning

Ere you can end this feast, of which, I pray you,

Make no abatement.—Once more, farewell all.

Exeunt Hippolyta, Emilia, Pirithous, and train towards the temple

FIRST QUEEN

Thus dost thou still make good the tongue o’th’ world.

SECOND QUEEN

And earn’st a deity equal with Mars—

THIRD QUEEN

If not above him, for Thou being but mortal mak’st affections bend

To godlike honours; they themselves, some say,

Groan under such a mast’ry.

THESEUS

As we are men,

Thus should we do; being sensually subdued

We lose our human title. Good cheer, ladies.

Now turn we towards your comforts.

⌈Flourish.⌉ Exeunt





1.2 Enter Palamon and Arcite



ARCITE

Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood,

And our prime cousin, yet unhardened in

The crimes of nature, let us leave the city,

Thebes, and the temptings in’t, before we further

Sully our gloss of youth.

And here to keep in abstinence we shame

As in incontinence; for not to swim

I’th’ aid o’th’ current were almost to sink—

At least to frustrate striving; and to follow

The common stream ’twould bring us to an eddy

Where we should turn or drown; if labour through,

Our gain but life and weakness.

PALAMON

Your advice

Is cried up with example. What strange ruins

Since first we went to school may we perceive

Walking in Thebes? Scars and bare weeds

The gain o’th’ martialist who did propound

To his bold ends honour and golden ingots,

Which though he won, he had not; and now flirted

By peace for whom he fought. Who then shall offer

To Mars’s so-scorned altar? I do bleed

When such I meet, and wish great Juno would

Resume her ancient fit of jealousy

To get the soldier work, that peace might purge

For her repletion and retain anew

Her charitable heart, now hard and harsher

Than strife or war could be.

ARCITE

Are you not out?

Meet you no ruin but the soldier in

The cranks and turns of Thebes? You did begin

As if you met decays of many kinds.

Perceive you none that do arouse your pity

But th’unconsidered soldier?

PALAMON

Yes, I pity

Decays where’er I find them, but such most

That, sweating in an honourable toil,

Are paid with ice to cool ’em.

ARCITE

’Tis not this

I did begin to speak of. This is virtue,

Of no respect in Thebes. I spake of Thebes,

How dangerous, if we will keep our honours,

It is for our residing where every evil

Hath a good colour, where every seeming good’s

A certain evil, where not to be ev’n jump

As they are here were to be strangers, and

Such things to be, mere monsters.

PALAMON

’Tis in our power,

Unless we fear that apes can tutor’s, to

Be masters of our manners. What need I

Affect another’s gait, which is not catching

Where there is faith? Or to be fond upon

Another’s way of speech, when by mine own

I may be reasonably conceived—saved, too—

Speaking it truly? Why am I bound

By any generous bond to follow him

Follows his tailor, haply so long until

The followed make pursuit? Or let me know

Why mine own barber is unblest—with him

My poor chin, too—for ’tis not scissored just

To such a favourite’s glass? What canon is there

That does command my rapier from my hip

To dangle’t in my hand? Or to go tiptoe

Before the street be foul? Either I am

The fore-horse in the team or I am none

That draw i’th’ sequent trace. These poor slight

sores

Need not a plantain. That which rips my bosom

Almost to th’ heart’s—

ARCITE

Our uncle Creon.

PALAMON

He,

A most unbounded tyrant, whose successes

Makes heaven unfeared and villainy assured

Beyond its power there’s nothing; almost puts

Faith in a fever, and deifies alone

Voluble chance; who only attributes

The faculties of other instruments

To his own nerves and act; commands men’s service,

And what they win in’t, boot and glory; one

That fears not to do harm, good dares not. Let

The blood of mine that’s sib to him be sucked

From me with leeches. Let them break and fall

Off me with that corruption.

ARCITE

Clear-spirited cousin,

Let’s leave his court that we may nothing share

Of his loud infamy: for our milk

Will relish of the pasture, and we must

Be vile or disobedient; not his kinsmen

In blood unless in quality.

PALAMON

Nothing truer.

I think the echoes of his shames have deafed

The ears of heav’nly justice. Widows’ cries

Descend again into their throats and have not

Enter Valerius





Due audience of the gods—Valerius.

VALERIUS

The King calls for you; yet be leaden-footed

Till his great rage be off him. Phoebus, when

He broke his whipstock and exclaimed against

The horses of the sun, but whispered to

The loudness of his fury.

PALAMON

Small winds shake him.

But what’s the matter?

VALERIUS

Theseus, who where he threats, appals, hath sent

Deadly defiance to him and pronounces

Ruin to Thebes, who is at hand to seal

The promise of his wrath.

ARCITE

Let him approach.

But that we fear the gods in him, he brings not

A jot of terror to us. Yet what man

Thirds his own worth—the case is each of ours—

When that his action’s dregged with mind assured

’Tis bad he goes about.

PALAMON

Leave that unreasoned.

Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon,

Yet to be neutral to him were dishonour,

Rebellious to oppose. Therefore we must

With him stand to the mercy of our fate,

Who hath bounded our last minute.

ARCITE

So we must.

Is’t said this war’s afoot? Or it shall be

On fail of some condition?

VALERIUS

’Tis in motion,

The intelligence of state came in the instant

With the defier.

PALAMON

Let’s to the King, who, were he A quarter carrier of that honour which

His enemy come in, the blood we venture

Should be as for our health, which were not spent,

Rather laid out for purchase. But, alas,

Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will

The fall o’th’ stroke do damage?

ARCITE

Let th’event—That never-erring arbitrator—tell us

When we know all ourselves, and let us follow

The becking of our chance.

Exeunt





1.3 Enter Pirithous, Hippolyta, and Emilia



PIRITHOUS

No further.

HIPPOLYTA

Sir, farewell. Repeat my wishes To our great lord, of whose success I dare not

Make any timorous question; yet I wish him

Excess and overflow of power, an’t might be,

To dure ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him;

Store never hurts good governors.

PIRITHOUS

Though I know His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they

Must yield their tribute there. (To Emilia) My precious

maid,

Those best affections that the heavens infuse

In their best-tempered pieces keep enthroned

In your dear heart.

EMILIA

Thanks, sir. Remember me To our all-royal brother, for whose speed

The great Bellona I’ll solicit; and

Since in our terrene state petitions are not

Without gifts understood, I’ll offer to her

What I shall be advised she likes. Our hearts

Are in his army, in his tent.

HIPPOLYTA

In’s bosom.

We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep

When our friends don their helms, or put to sea,

Or tell of babes broached on the lance, or women

That have sod their infants in—and after eat them—

The brine they wept at killing ’em: then if

You stay to see of us such spinsters, we

Should hold you here forever.

PIRITHOUS

Peace be to you As I pursue this war, which shall be then

Beyond further requiring.

Exit Pirithous

EMILIA

How his longing Follows his friend! Since his depart, his sports,

Though craving seriousness and skill, passed slightly

His careless execution, where nor gain

Made him regard or loss consider, but

Playing one business in his hand, another

Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal

To these so diff’ring twins. Have you observed him

Since our great lord departed?

HIPPOLYTA

With much labour; And I did love him for’t. They two have cabined

In many as dangerous as poor a corner,

Peril and want contending; they have skiffed

Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power

I’th’ least of these was dreadful, and they have

Fought out together where death’s self was lodged;

Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love,

Tied, weaved, entangled with so true, so long,

And with a finger of so deep a cunning,

May be outworn, never undone. I think

Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,

Cleaving his conscience into twain and doing

Each side like justice, which he loves best.

EMILIA

Doubtless There is a best, and reason has no manners

To say it is not you. I was acquainted

Once with a time when I enjoyed a playfellow;

You were at wars when she the grave enriched,

Who made too proud the bed; took leave o’th’

moon—

Which then looked pale at parting—when our count

Was each eleven.

HIPPOLYTA

’Twas Flavina.

EMILIA

Yes.

You talk of Pirithous’ and Theseus’ love:

Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasoned,

More buckled with strong judgement, and their needs

The one of th‘other may be said to water

Their intertangled roots of love; but I

And she I sigh and spoke of were things innocent,

Loved for we did, and like the elements,

That know not what, nor why, yet do effect

Rare issues by their operance, our souls

Did so to one another. What she liked

Was then of me approved; what not, condemned—

No more arraignment. The flower that I would pluck

And put between my breasts—O then but beginning

To swell about the blossom—she would long

Till she had such another, and commit it

To the like innocent cradle, where, phoenix-like,

They died in perfume. On my head no toy

But was her pattern. Her affections—pretty,

Though happily her careless wear—I followed

For my most serious decking. Had mine ear

Stol’n some new air, or at adventure hummed one,

From musical coinage, why, it was a note

Whereon her spirits would sojourn—rather dwell on—

And sing it in her slumbers. This rehearsal—

Which, seely innocence wots well, comes in

Like old emportment’s bastard—has this end:

That the true love ’tween maid and maid may be

More than in sex dividual.

HIPPOLYTA

You’re out of breath, And this high-speeded pace is but to say

That you shall never, like the maid Flavina,

Love any that’s called man.

EMILIA I am sure I shall not.

HIPPOLYTA

Now alack, weak sister, I must no more believe thee in this point—

Though in’t I know thou dost believe thyself—

Than I will trust a sickly appetite

That loathes even as it longs. But sure, my sister,

If I were ripe for your persuasion, you

Have said enough to shake me from the arm

Of the all-noble Theseus, for whose fortunes

I will now in and kneel, with great assurance

That we more than his Pirithous possess

The high throne in his heart.

EMILIA

I am not

Against your faith, yet I continue mine.

Exeunt





1.4 Cornetts. A battle struck within. Then a retreat. Flourish. Then enter Theseus, victor. The three Queens meet him and fall on their faces before him. Also enter a Herald, and attendants bearing Palamon and Arcite on two hearses



FIRST QUEEN (to Theseus)

To thee no star be dark.

SECOND QUEEN (to Theseus) Both heaven and earth

Friend thee for ever.

THIRD QUEEN (to Theseus) All the good that may Be wished upon thy head, I cry ‘Amen’ to’t.

THESEUS

Th’impartial gods, who from the mounted heavens

View us their mortal herd, behold who err

And in their time chastise. Go and find out

The bones of your dead lords and honour them

With treble ceremony: rather than a gap

Should be in their dear rites we would supply’t.

But those we will depute which shall invest

You in your dignities, and even each thing

Our haste does leave imperfect. So adieu,

And heaven’s good eyes look on you.

Exeunt the Queens

What are those?

HERALD

Men of great quality, as may be judged

By their appointment. Some of Thebes have told’s

They are sisters’ children, nephews to the King.

THESEUS

By th’ helm of Mars I saw them in the war,

Like to a pair of lions smeared with prey,

Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note

Constantly on them, for they were a mark

Worth a god’s view. What prisoner was’t that told me

When I enquired their names?

HERALD

Wi’ leave, they’re called Arcite and Palamon.

THESEUS

’Tis right: those, those. They are not dead?

HERALD

Nor in a state of life. Had they been taken

When their last hurts were given, ’twas possible

They might have been recovered. Yet they breathe,

And have the name of men.

THESEUS

Then like men use ‘em. The very lees of such, millions of rates

Exceed the wine of others. All our surgeons

Convent in their behoof; our richest balms,

Rather than niggard, waste. Their lives concern us

Much more than Thebes is worth. Rather than have

’em

Freed of this plight and in their morning state—

Sound and at liberty—I would ’em dead;

But forty-thousandfold we had rather have ’em

Prisoners to us, than death. Bear ‘em speedily

From our kind air, to them unkind, and minister

What man to man may do-for our sake, more,

Since I have known frights, fury, friends’ behests,

Love’s provocations, zeal, a mistress’ task,

Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,

Hath set a mark which nature could not reach to

Without some imposition, sickness in will

O’er-wrestling strength in reason. For our love

And great Apollo’s mercy, all our best

Their best skill tender.—Lead into the city

Where, having bound things scattered, we will post

To Athens fore our army.

Flourish. Exeunt





1.5 Music. Enter the three Queens with the hearses of their lords in a funeral solemnity, with attendants



Song





Urns and odours, bring away,

Vapours, sighs, darken the day;

Our dole more deadly looks than dying.

Balms and gums and heavy cheers,

Sacred vials filled with tears,

And clamours through the wild air flying:





Come all sad and solemn shows,

That are quick-eyed pleasure’s foes.

We convent naught else but woes,

We convent naught else but woes.



THIRD QUEEN

This funeral path brings to your household’s grave—

Joy seize on you again, peace sleep with him.

SECOND QUEEN

And this to yours.

FIRST QUEEN

Yours this way. Heavens lend A thousand differing ways to one sure end.

THIRD QUEEN

This world’s a city full of straying streets,

And death’s the market-place where each one meets.

Exeunt severally





2.1 Enter the Jailer and the Wooer



JAILER I may depart with little, while I live; something I may cast to you, not much. Alas, the prison I keep, though it be for great ones, yet they seldom come; before one salmon you shall take a number of minnows. I am given out to be better lined than it can appear to me report is a true speaker. I would I were really that I am delivered to be. Marry, what I have—be it what it will—I will assure upon my daughter at the day of my death.

WOOER Sir, I demand no more than your own offer, and I will estate your daughter in what I have promised.

JAILER Well, we will talk more of this when the solemnity is past. But have you a full promise of her?

Enter the Jailer’s Daughter with rushes





When that shall be seen, I tender my consent.

WOOER I have, sir. Here she comes.

JAILER (to Daughter) Your friend and I have chanced to name you here, upon the old business—but no more of that now. So soon as the court hurry is over we will have an end of it. I’th’ mean time, look tenderly to the two prisoners. I can tell you they are princes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER These strewings are for their chamber. ’Tis pity they are in prison, and ’twere pity they should be out. I do think they have patience to make any adversity ashamed; the prison itself is proud of ’em, and they have all the world in their chamber.

JAILER They are famed to be a pair of absolute men.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER By my troth, I think fame but stammers ’em—they stand a grece above the reach of report.

JAILER I heard them reported in the battle to be the only doers.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Nay, most likely, for they are noble sufferers. I marvel how they would have looked had they been victors, that with such a constant nobility enforce a freedom out of bondage, making misery their mirth, and affliction a toy to jest at.

JAILER Do they so?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER It seems to me they have no more sense of their captivity than I of ruling Athens. They eat well, look merrily, discourse of many things, but nothing of their own restraint and disasters. Yet sometime a divided sigh—martyred as ’twere i’th’ deliverance—will break from one of them, when the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke that I could wish myself a sigh to be so chid, or at least a sigher to be comforted.

WOOER I never saw ’em.

JAILER The Duke himself came privately in the night,

Palamon and Arcite appear ⌈at a window⌉ above



and so did they. What the reason of it is I know not. Look, yonder they are. That’s Arcite looks out.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER No, sir, no—that’s Palamon. Arcite is the lower of the twain—(pointing at Arcite) you may perceive a part of him.

JAILER Go to, leave your pointing. They would not make us their object. Out of their sight.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER It is a holiday to look on them. Lord, the difference of men!

Exeunt





2.2 Enter Palamon and Arcite in prison, ⌈in shackles, above⌉



PALAMON

How do you, noble cousin?

ARCITE How do you, sir?

PALAMON

Why, strong enough to laugh at misery

And bear the chance of war. Yet we are prisoners,

I fear, for ever, cousin.

ARCITE

I believe it, And to that destiny have patiently

Laid up my hour to come.

PALAMON

O, cousin Arcite, Where is Thebes now? Where is our noble country?

Where are our friends and kindreds? Never more

Must we behold those comforts, never see

The hardy youths strive for the games of honour,

Hung with the painted favours of their ladies,

Like tall ships under sail; then start amongst ’em

And, as an east wind, leave ’em all behind us,

Like lazy clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,

Even in the wagging of a wanton leg,

Outstripped the people’s praises, won the garlands

Ere they have time to wish ‘em ours. O never

Shall we two exercise, like twins of honour,

Our arms again and feel our fiery horses

Like proud seas under us. Our good swords, now—

Better the red-eyed god of war ne’er wore—

Ravished our sides, like age must run to rust

And deck the temples of those gods that hate us.

These hands shall never draw ’em out like lightning

To blast whole armies more.

ARCITE

No, Palamon, Those hopes are prisoners with us. Here we are,

And here the graces of our youths must wither,

Like a too-timely spring. Here age must find us

And, which is heaviest, Palamon, unmarried—

The sweet embraces of a loving wife

Loaden with kisses, armed with thousand Cupids,

Shall never clasp our necks; no issue know us;

No figures of ourselves shall we e’er see

To glad our age, and, like young eagles, teach ’em

Boldly to gaze against bright arms and say,

‘Remember what your fathers were, and conquer.’

The fair-eyed maids shall weep our banishments,

And in their songs curse ever-blinded fortune,

Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done

To youth and nature. This is all our world.

We shall know nothing here but one another,

Hear nothing but the clock that tells our woes.

The vine shall grow, but we shall never see it;

Summer shall come, and with her all delights,

But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.

PALAMON

’Tis too true, Arcite. To our Theban hounds

That shook the aged forest with their echoes,

No more now must we holler; no more shake

Our pointed javelins whilst the angry swine

Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,

Struck with our well-steeled darts. All valiant uses—

The food and nourishment of noble minds—

In us two here shall perish; we shall die—

Which is the curse of honour—lastly,

Children of grief and ignorance.

ARCITE

Yet, cousin, Even from the bottom of these miseries,

From all that fortune can inflict upon us,

I see two comforts rising—two mere blessings,

If the gods please, to hold here a brave patience

And the enjoying of our griefs together.

Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish

If I think this our prison.

PALAMON

Certainly ’Tis a main goodness, cousin, that our fortunes

Were twined together. ’Tis most true, two souls

Put in two noble bodies, let ’em suffer

The gall of hazard, so they grow together,

Will never sink; they must not, say they could.

A willing man dies sleeping and all’s done.

ARCITE

Shall we make worthy uses of this place

That all men hate so much?

PALAMON How, gentle cousin?

ARCITE

Let’s think this prison holy sanctuary,

To keep us from corruption of worse men.

We are young, and yet desire the ways of honour

That liberty and common conversation,

The poison of pure spirits, might, like women,

Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing

Can be, but our imaginations

May make it ours? And here being thus together,

We are an endless mine to one another:

We are one another’s wife, ever begetting

New births of love; we are father, friends,

acquaintance;

We are in one another, families—

I am your heir, and you are mine; this place

Is our inheritance: no hard oppressor

Dare take this from us. Here, with a little patience,

We shall live long and loving. No surfeits seek us—

The hand of war hurts none here, nor the seas

Swallow their youth. Were we at liberty

A wife might part us lawfully, or business;

Quarrels consume us; envy of ill men

Crave our acquaintance. I might sicken, cousin,

Where you should never know it, and so perish

Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,

Or prayers to the gods. A thousand chances,

Were we from hence, would sever us.

PALAMON

You have made me—I thank you, cousin Arcite—almost wanton

With my captivity. What a misery

It is to live abroad, and everywhere!

’Tis like a beast, methinks. I find the court here;

I am sure, a more content; and all those pleasures

That woo the wills of men to vanity

I see through now, and am sufficient

To tell the world ’tis but a gaudy shadow,

That old Time, as he passes by, takes with him.

What had we been, old in the court of Creon,

Where sin is justice, lust and ignorance

The virtues of the great ones? Cousin Arcite,

Had not the loving gods found this place for us,

We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,

And had their epitaphs, the people’s curses.

Shall I say more?

ARCITE I would hear you still.

PALAMON

Ye shall. Is there record of any two that loved

Better than we do, Arcite?

ARCITE Sure there cannot.

PALAMON

I do not think it possible our friendship

Should ever leave us.

ARCITE Till our deaths it cannot,

Enter Emilia and her Woman ⌈below⌉. Palamon sees Emilia and is silent

And after death our spirits shall be led

To those that love eternally. Speak on, sir.

EMILIA (to her Woman)

This garden has a world of pleasure in’t.

What flower is this?

WOMAN ’Tis called narcissus, madam.

EMILIA

That was a fair boy, certain, but a fool

To love himself. Were there not maids enough?

ARCITE (to Palamon)

Pray forward.

PALAMON Yes.

EMILIA (to her Woman) Or were they all hard-hearted?

WOMAN

They could not be to one so fair.

EMILIA Thou wouldst not.

WOMAN

I think I should not, madam.

EMILIA

That’s a good wench—But take heed to your kindness, though.

WOMAN Why, madam?

EMILIA

Men are mad things.

ARCITE (to Palamon) Will ye go forward, cousin?

EMILIA (to her Woman)

Canst not thou work such flowers in silk, wench?

WOMAN Yes.

EMILIA

I’ll have a gown full of ’em, and of these.

This is a pretty colour—will’t not do

Rarely upon a skirt, wench?

WOMAN Dainty, madam.

ARCITE (to Palamon)

Cousin, cousin, how do you, sir? Why, Palamon!

PALAMON

Never till now was I in prison, Arcite.

ARCITE

Why, what’s the matter, man?

PALAMON Behold and wonder!

Arcite sees Emilia





By heaven, she is a goddess!

ARCITE Ha!

PALAMON

Do reverence.

She is a goddess, Arcite.

EMILIA (to her Woman)

Of all flowers

Methinks a rose is best.

WOMAN Why, gentle madam?

EMILIA

It is the very emblem of a maid—

For when the west wind courts her gently,

How modestly she blows, and paints the sun

With her chaste blushes! When the north comes near

her,

Rude and impatient, then, like chastity,

She locks her beauties in her bud again,

And leaves him to base briers.

WOMAN

Yet, good madam, Sometimes her modesty will blow so far

She falls for’t—a maid,

If she have any honour, would be loath

To take example by her.

EMILIA Thou art wanton.

ARCITE (to Palamon)

She is wondrous fair.

PALAMON She is all the beauty extant.

EMILIA (to her Woman)

The sun grows high—let’s walk in. Keep these flowers.

We’ll see how close art can come near their colours.

I am wondrous merry-hearted—I could laugh now.

WOMAN

I could lie down, I am sure.

EMILIA And take one with you?

WOMAN

That’s as we bargain, madam.

EMILIA Well, agree then.

Exeunt Emilia and her Woman

PALAMON

What think you of this beauty?

ARCITE ’Tis a rare one.

PALAMON

Is’t but a rare one?

ARCITE Yes, a matchless beauty.

PALAMON

Might not a man well lose himself and love her?

ARCITE

I cannot tell what you have done; I have,

Beshrew mine eyes for’t. Now I feel my shackles.

PALAMON You love her then?

ARCITE Who would not?

PALAMON And desire her?

ARCITE Before my liberty.

PALAMON

I saw her first.

ARCITE

That’s nothing.

PALAMON

But it shall be.

ARCITE

I saw her too.

PALAMON

Yes, but you must not love her.

ARCITE

I will not, as you do, to worship her

As she is heavenly and a blessèd goddess!

I love her as a woman, to enjoy her—

So both may love.

PALAMON

You shall not love at all.

ARCITE

Not love at all—who shall deny me?

PALAMON

I that first saw her, I that took possession

First with mine eye of all those beauties

In her revealed to mankind. If thou lov’st her,

Or entertain’st a hope to blast my wishes,

Thou art a traitor, Arcite, and a fellow

False as thy title to her. Friendship, blood,

And all the ties between us I disclaim,

If thou once think upon her.

ARCITE

Yes, I love her—And if the lives of all my name lay on it,

I must do so. I love her with my soul—

If that will lose ye, farewell, Palamon!

I say again,

I love her, and in loving her maintain

I am as worthy and as free a lover,

And have as just a title to her beauty,

As any Palamon, or any living

That is a man’s son.

PALAMON

Have I called thee friend?

ARCITE

Yes, and have found me so. Why are you moved

thus?

Let me deal coldly with you. Am not I

Part of your blood, part of your soul? You have

told me

That I was Palamon and you were Arcite.

PALAMON Yes.

ARCITE

Am not I liable to those affections,

Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall

suffer?

PALAMON

Ye may be.

ARCITE

Why then would you deal so cunningly, So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman,

To love alone? Speak truly. Do you think me

Unworthy of her sight?

PALAMON

No, but unjust If thou pursue that sight.

ARCITE

Because another First sees the enemy, shall I stand still,

And let mine honour down, and never charge?

PALAMON

Yes, if he be but one.

ARCITE

But say that one

Had rather combat me?

PALAMON

Let that one say so, And use thy freedom; else, if thou pursuest her,

Be as that cursed man that hates his country,

A branded villain.

ARCITE

You are mad.

PALAMON

I must be. Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me;

And in this madness if I hazard thee

And take thy life, I deal but truly.

ARCITE

Fie, sir. You play the child extremely. I will love her,

I must, I ought to do so, and I dare—

And all this justly.

PALAMON

O, that now, that now Thy false self and thy friend had but this fortune—

To be one hour at liberty and grasp

Our good swords in our hands! I would quickly teach

thee

What ’twere to filch affection from another.

Thou art baser in it than a cutpurse.

Put but thy head out of this window more

And, as I have a soul, I’ll nail thy life to’t.

ARCITE

Thou dar’st not, fool; thou canst not; thou art feeble.

Put my head out? I’ll throw my body out

And leap the garden when I see her next,

Enter the Jailer ⌈above⌉





And pitch between her arms to anger thee.

PALAMON

No more—the keeper’s coming. I shall live

To knock thy brains out with my shackles.

ARCITE Do.

JAILER

By your leave, gentlemen.

PALAMON Now, honest keeper?

JAILER

Lord Arcite, you must presently to th’ Duke.

The cause I know not yet.

ARCITE I am ready, keeper.

JAILER

Prince Palamon, I must a while bereave you

Of your fair cousin’s company.

Exeunt Arcite and the Jailer

PALAMON

And me, too, Even when you please, of life. Why is he sent for?

It may be he shall marry her—he’s goodly,

And like enough the Duke hath taken notice

Both of his blood and body. But his falsehood!

Why should a friend be treacherous? If that

Get him a wife so noble and so fair,

Let honest men ne’er love again. Once more

I would but see this fair one. Blessèd garden,

And fruit and flowers more blessed, that still blossom

As her bright eyes shine on ye! Would I were,

For all the fortune of my life hereafter,

Yon little tree, yon blooming apricot—

How I would spread and fling my wanton arms

In at her window! I would bring her fruit

Fit for the gods to feed on; youth and pleasure

Still as she tasted should be doubled on her;

And if she be not heavenly, I would make her

So near the gods in nature they should fear her—

Enter the Jailer ⌈bove⌉





And then I am sure she would love me. How now,

keeper,

Where’s Arcite?

JAILER

Banished—Prince Pirithous Obtained his liberty; but never more,

Upon his oath and life, must he set foot

Upon this kingdom.

PALAMON ⌈aside⌉

He’s a blessed man. He shall see Thebes again, and call to arms

The bold young men that, when he bids ’em charge,

Fall on like fire. Arcite shall have a fortune,

If he dare make himself a worthy lover,

Yet in the field to strike a battle for her;

And if he lose her then, he’s a cold coward.

How bravely may he bear himself to win her

If he be noble Arcite; thousand ways!

Were I at liberty I would do things

Of such a virtuous greatness that this lady,

This blushing virgin, should take manhood to her

And seek to ravish me.

JAILER My lord, for you

I have this charge to—

PALAMON To discharge my life.

JAILER

No, but from this place to remove your lordship—

The windows are too open.

PALAMON

Devils take ’em That are so envious to me—prithee kill me.

JAILER

And hang for’t afterward?

PALAMON

By this good light, Had I as word I would kill thee.

JAILER Why, my lord?

PALAMON

Thou bring’st such pelting scurvy news continually,

Thou art not worthy life. I will not go.

JAILER

Indeed you must, my lord.

PALAMON May I see the garden?

JAILER

No.

PALAMON Then I am resolved—I will not go.

JAILER

I must constrain you, then; and for you are dangerous,

I’ll clap more irons on you.

PALAMON

Do, good keeper. I’ll shake ’em so ye shall not sleep:

I’ll make ye a new morris. Must I go?

JAILER

There is no remedy.

PALAMON

Farewell, kind window. May rude wind never hurt thee. O, my lady,

If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,

Dream how I suffer. Come, now bury me.

Exeunt Palamon and the Jailer





2.3 Enter Arcite



ARCITE

Banished the kingdom? ’Tis a benefit,

A mercy I must thank ’em for; but banished

The free enjoying of that face I die for—

O, ‘twas a studied punishment, a death

Beyond imagination; such a vengeance

That, were I old and wicked, all my sins

Could never pluck upon me. Palamon,

Thou hast the start now—thou shalt stay and see

Her bright eyes break each morning ’gainst thy

window,

And let in life into thee. Thou shalt feed

Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty

That nature ne’er exceeded, nor ne’er shall.

Good gods! What happiness has Palamon!

Twenty to one he’ll come to speak to her,

And if she be as gentle as she’s fair,

I know she’s his—he has a tongue will tame

Tempests and make the wild rocks wanton.

Come what can come,

The worst is death. I will not leave the kingdom.

I know mine own is but a heap of ruins,

And no redress there. If I go he has her.

I am resolved another shape shall make me,

Or end my fortunes. Either way I am happy—

I’ll see her and be near her, or no more.

Enter four Country People, one of whom carries a garland before them. Arcite stands apart





FIRST COUNTRYMAN

My masters, I’ll be there—that’s certain.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN And I’ll be there.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN And I.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

Why then, have with ye, boys! ’Tis but a chiding—

Let the plough play today, I’ll tickle’t out

Of the jades’ tails tomorrow.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN I am sure

To have my wife as jealous as a turkey—

But that’s all one. I’ll go through, let her mumble.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

Clap her aboard tomorrow night and stow her,

And all’s made up again.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN

Ay, do but put A fescue in her fist and you shall see her

Take a new lesson out and be a good wench.

Do we all hold against the maying?

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

Hold? What should ail us?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN Areas will be there.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN And Sennois, and Rycas, and three better lads ne’er danced under green tree; and ye know what wenches, ha? But will the dainty dominie, the schoolmaster, keep touch, do you think? For he does all, ye know.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN He’ll eat a hornbook ere he fail. Go to, the matter’s too far driven between him and the tanner’s daughter to let slip now, and she must see the Duke, and she must dance too.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN Shall we be lusty?

SECOND COUNTRYMAN All the boys in Athens blow wind i’th’ breech on’s! And here I’ll be and there I’ll be, for our town, and here again and there again—ha, boys, hey for the weavers!

FIRST COUNTRYMAN This must be done i’th’ woods.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN O, pardon me.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN By any means, our thing of learning said so; where he himself will edify the Duke most parlously in our behalfs—he’s excellent i’th’ woods, bring him to th’ plains, his learning makes no cry.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN We’ll see the sports, then every man to’s tackle—and, sweet companions, let’s rehearse, by any means, before the ladies see us, and do sweetly, and God knows what may come on’t.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN Content—the sports once ended, we’ll perform. Away boys, and hold.

ARCITE (coming forward) By your leaves, honest friends, pray you whither go you? 6

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

Whither? Why, what a question’s that?

ARCITE Yet ’tis a question

To me that know not.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN To the games, my friend.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

Where were you bred, you know it not?

ARCITE Not far, sir

Are there such games today?

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

Yes, marry, are there, And such as you never saw. The Duke himself

Will be in person there.

ARCITE What pastimes are they?

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

Wrestling and running. (To the others) ’Tis a pretty fellow.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN (to Arcite)

Thou wilt not go along?

ARCITE Not yet, sir.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

Well, sir, Take your own time. (To the others) Come, boys.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

My mind misgives me—This fellow has a vengeance trick o’th’ hip:

Mark how his body’s made for’t.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

I’ll be hanged though If he dare venture; hang him, plum porridge!

He wrestle? He roast eggs! Come, let’s be gone, lads.

Exeunt the four Countrymen

ARCITE

This is an offered opportunity

I durst not wish for. Well I could have wrestled—

The best men called it excellent—and run

Swifter than wind upon a field of corn,

Curling the wealthy ears, never flew. I’ll venture,

And in some poor disguise be there. Who knows

Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands,

And happiness prefer me to a place

Where I may ever dwell in sight of her? Exit





2.4 Enter the Jailer’s Daughter



JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Why should I love this gentleman? ’Tis odds

He never will affect me. I am base,

My father the mean keeper of his prison,

And he a prince. To marry him is hopeless,

To be his whore is witless. Out upon’t,

What pushes are we wenches driven to

When fifteen once has found us? First, I saw him;

I, seeing, thought he was a goodly man;

He has as much to please a woman in him—

If he please to bestow it so—as ever

These eyes yet looked on. Next, I pitied him,

And so would any young wench, o‘my conscience,

That ever dreamed or vowed her maidenhead

To a young handsome man. Then, I loved him,

Extremely loved him, infinitely loved him—

And yet he had a cousin fair as he, too.

But in my heart was Palamon, and there,

Lord, what a coil he keeps! To hear him

Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is!

And yet his songs are sad ones. Fairer spoken

Was never gentleman. When I come in

To bring him water in a morning, first

He bows his noble body, then salutes me, thus:

‘Fair, gentle maid, good morrow. May thy goodness

Get thee a happy husband.’ Once he kissed me—

I loved my lips the better ten days after.

Would he would do so every day! He grieves much,

And me as much to see his misery.

What should I do to make him know I love him?

For I would fain enjoy him. Say I ventured

To set him free? What says the law then? Thus much

For law or kindred! I will do it,

And this night; ere tomorrow he shall love me. Exit





2.5 Short flourish of cornetts and shouts within. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous, Emilia, Arcite disguised, with a garland, and attendants



THESEUS

You have done worthily. I have not seen

Since Hercules a man of tougher sinews.

Whate’er you are, you run the best and wrestle

That these times can allow.

ARCITE I am proud to please you.

THESEUS

What country bred you?

ARCITE

This—but far off, prince.

THESEUS

Are you a gentleman?

ARCITE

My father said so, And to those gentle uses gave me life.

THESEUS

Are you his heir?

ARCITE

His youngest, sir.

THESEUS

Your father Sure is a happy sire, then. What proves you?

ARCITE

A little of all noble qualities.

I could have kept a hawk and well have hollered

To a deep cry of dogs; I dare not praise

My feat in horsemanship, yet they that knew me

Would say it was my best piece; last and greatest,

I would be thought a soldier.

THESEUS You are perfect.

PIRITHOIIS

Upon my soul, a proper man.

EMILIA

He is so.

PIRITHOUS (to Hippolyta)

How do you like him, lady?

HIPPOLYTA

I admire him. I have not seen so young a man so noble—

If he say true—of his sort.

EMILIA

Believe His mother was a wondrous handsome woman—

His face methinks goes that way.

HIPPOLYTA

But his body And fiery mind illustrate a brave father.

PIRITHOUS

Mark how his virtue, like a hidden sun,

Breaks through his baser garments.

HIPPOLYTA

He’s well got, sure.

THESEUS (to Arcite)

What made you seek this place, sir?

ARCITE

Noble Theseus, To purchase name and do my ablest service

To such a well-found wonder as thy worth,

For only in thy court of all the world

Dwells fair-eyed honour.

PIRITHOUS

All his words are worthy.

THESEUS (to Arcite)

Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,

Nor shall you lose your wish.—Pirithous,

Dispose of this fair gentleman.

PIRITHOUS

Thanks, Theseus. (To Arcite) Whate’er you are, you’re mine, and I shall

give you

To a most noble service, to this lady,

This bright young virgin; pray observe her goodness.

You have honoured her fair birthday with your

virtues,

And as your due you’re hers. Kiss her fair hand, sir.

ARCITE

Sir, you’re a noble giver. (To Emilia) Dearest beauty,

Thus let me seal my vowed faith.

He kisses her hand





When your servant,

Your most unworthy creature, but offends you,

Command him die, he shall.

EMILIA

That were too cruel. If you deserve well, sir, I shall soon see’t.

You’re mine, and somewhat better than your rank I’ll

use you.

PIRITHOUS (to Arcite)

I’ll see you furnished, and, because you say

You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you

This afternoon to ride—but ’tis a rough one.

ARCITE

I like him better, prince—I shall not then

Freeze in my saddle.

THESEUS (to Hippolyta)

Sweet, you must be ready—And you, Emilia, ⌈to Pirithous] and you, friend—and

all,

Tomorrow by the sun, to do observance

To flow’ry May in Dian’s wood. (To Arcite) Wait well,

sir,

Upon your mistress.—Emity, I hope

He shall not go afoot.

EMILIA

That were a shame, sir, While I have horses. (To Arcite) Take your choice, and

what

You want, at any time, let me but know it.

If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you,

You’ll find a loving mistress.

ARCITE

If I do not, Let me find that my father ever hated—

Disgrace and blows.

THESEUS

Go, lead the way—you have won it. It shall be so: you shall receive all dues

Fit for the honour you have won. ’Twere wrong else.

(To Emilia) Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a

servant

That, if I were a woman, would be master.

But you are wise.

EMILIA

I hope too wise for that, sir.

Flourish. Exeunt





2.6 Enter the jailer’s Daughter



JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Let all the dukes and all the devils roar—

He is at liberty! I have ventured for him,

And out I have brought him. To a little wood

A mile hence I have sent him, where a cedar

Higher than all the rest spreads like a plane,

Fast by a brook—and there he shall keep close

Till I provide him files and food, for yet

His iron bracelets are not off. O Love,

What a stout-hearted child thou art! My father

Durst better have endured cold iron than done it.

I love him beyond love and beyond reason

Or wit or safety. I have made him know it—

I care not, I am desperate. If the law

Find me and then condemn me for‘t, some wenches,

Some honest-hearted maids, will sing my dirge

And tell to memory my death was noble,

Dying almost a martyr. That way he takes,

I purpose, is my way too. Sure, he cannot

Be so unmanly as to leave me here.

If he do, maids will not so easily

Trust men again. And yet, he has not thanked me

For what I have done—no, not so much as kissed me—

And that, methinks, is not so well. Nor scarcely

Could I persuade him to become a free man,

He made such scruples of the wrong he did

To me and to my father. Yet, I hope

When he considers more, this love of mine

Will take more root within him. Let him do

What he will with me—so he use me kindly.

For use me, so he shall, or I’ll proclaim him,

And to his face, no man. I’ll presently

Provide him necessaries and pack my clothes up,

And where there is a patch of ground I’ll venture,

So he be with me. By him, like a shadow,

I’ll ever dwell. Within this hour the hubbub

Will be all o’er the prison—I am then

Kissing the man they look for. Farewell, father:

Get many more such prisoners and such daughters,

And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him.

Exit





3.1 A bush in place.⌉ Cornetts in sundry places. Noise and hollering as of people a-Maying. Enter Arcite



ARCITE

The Duke has lost Hippo)yta—each took

A several laund. This is a solemn rite

They owe bloomed May, and the Athenians pay it

To th’ heart of ceremony. O, Queen Emilia,

Fresher than May, sweeter

Than her gold buttons on the boughs, or all

Th’enamelled knacks o’th’ mead or garden—yea,

We challenge too the bank of any nymph

That makes the stream seem flowers; thou, O jewel

O’th’ wood, o’th’ world, hast likewise blessed a pace

With thy sole presence in thy ⌈

⌉ rumination

That I, poor man, might eftsoons come between

And chop on some cold thought. Thrice blessèd

chance

To drop on such a mistress, expectation

Most guiltless on‘t! Tell me, O Lady Fortune,

Next after Emily my sovereign, how far

I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,

Hath made me near her, and this beauteous morn,

The prim’st of all the year, presents me with

A brace of horses—two such steeds might well

Be by a pair of kings backed, in a field

That their crowns’ titles tried. Alas, alas,

Poor cousin Palamon, poor prisoner—thou

So little dream’st upon my fortune that

Thou think’st thyself the happier thing to be

So near Emilia. Me thou deem’st at Thebes,

And therein wretched, although free. But if

Thou knew’st my mistress breathed on me, and that

I eared her language, lived in her eye-O, coz,

What passion would enclose thee!

Enter Palamon as out of a bush with his shackles. He bends his fist at Arcite





PALAMON

Traitor kinsman, Thou shouldst perceive my passion if these signs

Of prisonment were off me, and this hand

But owner of a sword. By all oaths in one,

I and the justice of my love would make thee

A confessed traitor. O thou most perfidious

That ever gently looked, the void’st of honour

That e’er bore gentle token, falsest cousin

That ever blood made kin—call’st thou her thine?

I’ll prove it in my shackles, with these hands,

Void of appointment, that thou liest and art

A very thief in love, a chaffy lord

Not worth the name of villain. Had I as word

And these house-clogs away—

ARCITE

Dear cousin Palamon—

PALAMON

Cozener Arcite, give me language such

As thou hast showed me feat.

ARCITE

Not finding in The circuit of my breast any gross stuff

To form me like your blazon holds me to

This gentleness of answer—’tis your passion

That thus mistakes, the which, to you being enemy,

Cannot to me be kind. Honour and honesty

I cherish and depend on, howsoe’er

You skip them in me, and with them, fair coz,

I’ll maintain my proceedings. Pray be pleased

To show in generous terms your griefs, since that

Your question’s with your equal, who professes

To clear his own way with the mind and sword

Of a true gentleman.

PALAMON

That thou durst, Arcite!

ARCITE

My coz, my coz, you have been well advertised

How much I dare; you’ve seen me use my sword

Against th’advice of fear. Sure, of another

You would not hear me doubted, but your silence

Should break out, though i’th’ sanctuary.

PALAMON

Sir, I have seen you move in such a place which well

Might justify your manhood; you were called

A good knight and a bold. But the whole week’s not

fair

If any day it rain: their valiant temper

Men lose when they incline to treachery,

And then they fight like compelled bears—would fly

Were they not tied.

ARCITE

Kinsman, you might as well Speak this and act it in your glass as to

His ear which now disdains you.

PALAMON

Come up to me, Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword,

Though it be rusty, and the charity

Of one meal lend me. Come before me then,

A good sword in thy hand, and do but say

That Emily is thine-I will forgive

The trespass thou hast done me, yea, my life,

If then thou carry’t; and brave souls in shades

That have died manly, which will seek of me

Some news from earth, they shall get none but this—

That thou art brave and noble.

ARCITE

Be content, Again betake you to your hawthorn house.

With counsel of the night I will be here

With wholesome viands. These impediments

Will I file off. You shall have garments and

Perfumes to kill the smell o’th’ prison. After,

When you shall stretch yourself and say but ’Arcite,

I am in plight’, there shall be at your choice

Both sword and armour.

PALAMON

O, you heavens, dares any So noble bear a guilty business! None

But only Arcite, therefore none but Arcite

In this kind is so bold.

ARCITE Sweet Palamon.

PALAMON

I do embrace you and your offer—for

Your offer do’t I only, sir; your person,

Without hypocrisy, I may not wish

Wind horns within



More than my sword’s edge on’t.

ARCITE

You hear the horns—Enter your muset lest this match between’s

Be crossed ere met. Give me your hand, farewell.

I’ll bring you every needful thing—I pray you,

Take comfort and be strong.

PALAMON

Pray hold your promise, And do the deed with a bent brow. Most certain

You love me not—be rough with me and pour

This oil out of your language. By this air,

I could for each word give a cuff, my stomach

Not reconciled by reason.

ARCITE

Plainly spoken, Yet—pardon me—hard language: when I spur

Wind horns within

My horse I chide him not. Content and anger

In me have but one face. Hark, sir, they call

The scattered to the banquet. You must guess

I have an office there.

PALAMON

Sir, your attendance Cannot please heaven, and I know your office

Unjustly is achieved.

ARCITE

’Tis a good title. I am persuaded this question, sick between’s,

By bleeding must be cured. I am a suitor

That to your sword you will bequeath this plea

And talk of it no more.

PALAMON

But this one word: You are going now to gaze upon my mistress—

For note you, mine she is—

ARCITE Nay then—

PALAMON

Nay, pray you—You talk of feeding me to breed me strength—

You are going now to look upon a sun

That strengthens what it looks on. There you have

A vantage o’er me, but enjoy it till

I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.

Exeunt severally, ⌈Palamon as into the bush⌉





3.2 Enter the Jailer’s Daughter, with a file



JAILER’S DAUGHTER

He has mistook the brake I meant, is gone

After his fancy. ’Tis now wellnigh morning.

No matter—would it were perpetual night,

And darkness lord o’th’ world. Hark, ’tis a wolf!

In me hath grief slain fear, and, but for one thing,

I care for nothing—and that’s Palamon.

I reck not if the wolves would jaw me, so

He had this file. What if I hollered for him?

I cannot holler. If I whooped, what then?

If he not answered, I should call a wolf

And do him but that service. I have heard

Strange howls this livelong night—why may’t not be

They have made prey of him? He has no weapons;

He cannot run; the jangling of his gyves

Might call fell things to listen, who have in them

A sense to know a man unarmed, and can

Smell where resistance is. I’ll set it down

He’s torn to pieces: they howled many together

And then they fed on him. So much for that.

Be bold to ring the bell. How stand I then?

All’s chared when he is gone. No, no, I lie:

My father’s to be hanged for his escape,

Myself to beg, if I prized life so much

As to deny my act—but that I would not,

Should I try death by dozens. I am moped—

Food took I none these two days,

Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes

Save when my lids scoured off their brine. Alas,

Dissolve, my life; let not my sense unsettle,

Lest I should drown or stab or hang myself.

O state of nature, fail together in me,

Since thy best props are warped. So which way now?

The best way is the next way to a grave,

Each errant step beside is torment. Lo,

The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screech-owl

Calls in the dawn. All offices are done

Save what I fail in: but the point is this,

An end, and that is all.

Exit





3.3 Enter Arcite with a bundle containing meat, wine, and files



ARCITE

I should be near the place. Ho, cousin Patamon!

Enter Palamon ⌈as from the bush⌉





PALAMON

Arcite.

ARCITE

The same. I have brought you food and files. Come forth and fear not, here’s no Theseus.

PALAMON

Nor none so honest, Arcite.

ARCITE

That’s no matter—We’ll argue that hereafter. Come, take courage—

You shall not die thus beastly. Here, sir, drink;

I know you are faint. Then I’ll talk further with you.

PALAMON

Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.

ARCITE

I might—But I must fear you first. Sit down and, good now,

No more of these vain parleys. Let us not,

Having our ancient reputation with us,

Make talk for fools and cowards. To your health, sir.

PALAMON

Do.

⌈Arcite drinks⌉





ARCITE Pray sit down, then, and let me entreat you, By all the honesty and honour in you, No mention of this woman—’twilt disturb us. We shall have time enough.

PALAMON

Well, sir, I’ll pledge you.

Palamon drinks





ARCITE

Drink a good hearty draught; it breeds good blood,

man.

Do not you feel it thaw you?

PALAMON

Stay, I’ll tell you

After a draught or two more.

Palamon drinks





ARCITE

Spare it not—

The Duke has more, coz. Eat now.

PALAMON

Yes.

Palamon eats





ARCITE

I am glad

You have so good a stomach.

PALAMON

I am gladder

I have so good meat to’t.

ARCITE

Is’t not mad, lodging Here in the wild woods, cousin?

PALAMON

Yes, for them

That have wild consciences.

ARCITE

How tastes your victuals?

Your hunger needs no sauce, I see.

PALAMON

Not much.

But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.

What is this?

ARCITE Venison.

PALAMON

’Tis a lusty meat—

Give me more wine. Here, Arcite, to the wenches

We have known in our days. ⌈Drinking⌉ The lord

steward’s daughter.

Do you remember her?

ARCITE

After you, coz.

PALAMON

She loved a black-haired man.

ARCITE

She did so; well, sir.

PALAMON

And I have heard some call him Arcite, and—

ARCITE

Out with’t, faith.

PALAMON

She met him in an arbour—

What did she there, coz? Play o’th’ virginals?

ARCITE

Something she did, sir—

PALAMON

Made her groan a month for’t—

Or two, or three, or ten.

ARCITE

The marshal’s sister Had her share too, as I remember, cousin,

Else there be tales abroad. You’ll pledge her?

PALAMON Yes.

⌈They drink⌉





ARCITE

A pretty brown wench ’tis. There was a time

When young men went a-hunting, and a wood,

And a broad beech, and thereby hangs a tale—

Heigh-ho!

PALAMON

For Emily, upon my life! Fool,

Away with this strained mirth. I say again,

That sigh was breathed for Emily. Base cousin,

Dar’st thou break first?

ARCITE

You are wide.

PALAMON

By heaven and earth,

There’s nothing in thee honest.

ARCITE

Then I’ll leave you—

You are a beast now.

PALAMON As thou mak’st me, traitor.

ARCITE (pointing to the bundle)

There’s all things needful: files and shirts and

perfumes—

I’ll come again some two hours hence and bring

That that shall quiet all.

PALAMON A sword and armour.

ARCITE

Fear me not. You are now too foul. Farewell.

Get off your trinkets: you shall want naught.

PALAMON Sirrah—

ARCITE

I’ll hear no more.

Exit

PALAMON

If he keep touch, he dies for’t.

Exit ⌈as into the bush⌉





3.4 Enter the Jailer’s Daughter



JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I am very cold, and all the stars are out too,

The little stars and all, that look like agtets—

The sun has seen my folly. Palamon!

Alas, no, he’s in heaven. Where am I now?

Yonder’s the sea and there’s a ship—how’t tumbles!

And there’s a rock lies watching under water—

Now, now, it beats upon it—now, now, now,

There’s a leak sprung, a sound one—how they cry!

Open her before the wind—you’ll lose all else.

Up with a course or two and tack about, boys.

Good night, good night, you’re gone. I am very

hungry.

Would I could find a fine frog—he would tell me

News from all parts o‘th’ world, then would I make

A carrack of a cockle-shell, and sail

By east and north-east to the King of Pygmies,

For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my father,

Twenty to one, is trussed up in a trice

Tomorrow morning. I’ll say never a word.

(She sings)

For I’ll cut my green coat, a foot above my knee,

And I’ll clip my yellow locks, an inch below mine eye,

Hey nonny, nonny, nonny,

He s’buy me a white cut, forth for to ride,

And I’ll go seek him, through the world that is so wide,

Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.

O for a prick now, like a nightingale,

To put my breast against. I shall sleep like a top else.

Exit





3.5 Enter Gerald (a schoolmaster), five Countrymen, one of whom is dressed as a Babion, five Wenches, and Timothy, a taborer. All are attired as morris dancers



SCHOOLMASTER Fie, fie,

What tediosity and disinsanity

Is here among yet Have my rudiments

Been laboured so long with ye, milked unto ye,

And, by a figure, even the very plum-broth

And marrow of my understanding laid upon ye?

And do you still cry ‘where?’ and ‘how?’ and

‘wherefore?’

You most coarse frieze capacities, ye jean judgements,

Have I said, ‘thus let be’, and ‘there let be’,

And ‘then let be’, and no man understand me?

Proh deum, medius fidius-ye are all dunces.

Forwhy, here stand I. Here the Duke comes. There are

you,

Close in the thicket. The Duke appears. I meet him,

And unto him I utter learnèd things

And many figures. He hears, and nods, and hums,

And then cries, ‘Rare!’, and I go forward. At length

I fling my cap up—mark there—then do you,

As once did Meleager and the boar,

Break comely out before him, like true lovers,

Cast yourselves in a body decently,

And sweetly, by a figure, trace and turn, boys.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

And sweetly we will do it, master Gerald.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

Draw up the company. Where’s the taborer?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN

Why, Timothy!

TABORER Here, my mad boys, have at ye!

SCHOOLMASTER

But I say, where’s these women?

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN Here’s Friz and Madeline.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing Barbara.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

And freckled Nell, that never failed her master.

SCHOOLMASTER

Where be your ribbons, maids? Swim with your bodies

And carry it sweetly and deliverly,

And now and then a favour and a frisk.

NELL

Let us alone, sir.

SCHOOLMASTER

Where’s the rest o’th’ music?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN

Dispersed as you commanded.

SCHOOLMASTER

Couple, then,

And see what’s wanting. Where’s the babion?

(To the Babion) My friend, carry your tail without

offence

Or scandal to the ladies; and be sure

You tumble with audacity and manhood,

And when you bark, do it with judgement.

BABION Yes, sir.

SCHOOLMASTER

Quousque tandem? Here is a woman wanting!

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

We may go whistle—all the fat’s i’th’ fire.

SCHOOLMASTER We have,

As learned authors utter, washed a tile;

We have been fatuus, and laboured vainly.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

This is that scornful piece, that scurvy hilding

That gave her promise faithfully she would be here—

Cicely, the seamstress’ daughter.

The next gloves that I give her shall be dogskin.

Nay, an she fail me once—you can tell, Areas,

She swore by wine and bread she would not break.

SCHOOLMASTER An eel and woman,

A learned poet says, unless by th’ tail

And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail—

In manners this was false position.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

A fire-ill take her! Does she flinch now?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN What

Shall we determine, sir?

SCHOOLMASTER

Nothing;

Our business is become a nullity,

Yea, and a woeful and a piteous nullity.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN

Now, when the credit of our town lay on it,

Now to be frampold, now to piss o’th’ nettle!

Go thy ways—I’ll remember thee, I’ll fit thee!

Enter the Jailer’s Daughter





JAILER’S DAUGHTER (sings)

The George Alow came from the south,

From the coast of Barbary-a;

And there he met with brave gallants of war,

By one, by two, by three-a.

‘Well hailed, well hailed, you jolly gallants,

And whither now are you bound-a?

O let me have your company

Till I come to the sound-a.’





There was three fools fell out about an owlet—

The one he said it was an owl,

The other he said nay,

The third he said it was a hawk,

And her bells were cut away.





THIRD COUNTRYMAN

There’s a dainty madwoman, master,

Comes i’th’ nick, as mad as a March hare.

If we can get her dance, we are made again.

I warrant her, she’ll do the rarest gambols.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN

A madwoman? We are made, boys.

SCHOOLMASTER (to the Jailer’s Daughter)

And are you mad, good woman?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I would be sorry else.

Give me your hand.

SCHOOLMASTER

Why?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I can tell your fortune.

⌈She examines his hand⌉





You are a fool. Tell ten—I have posed him. Buzz!

Friend, you must eat no white bread—if you do,

Your teeth will bleed extremely. Shall we dance, ho?

I know you—you’re a tinker. Sirrah tinker,

Stop no more holes but what you should.

SCHOOLMASTER

Dii boni—

A tinker, damsel?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Or a conjurer—

Raise me a devil now and let him play

Qui passa o’th’ bells and bones.

SCHOOLMASTER

Go, take her,

And fluently persuade her to a peace.

Et opus exegi, quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis—

Strike up, and lead her in.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN

Come, lass, let’s trip it.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER I’ll lead.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN Do, do.

SCHOOLMASTER

Persuasively and cunningly—

Wind horns within





away, boys,

I hear the horns. Give me some meditation,

And mark your cue.

Exeunt all but Gerald the Schoolmaster Pallas inspire me.

Enter Theseus, Pirithous, Hippolyta, Emilia, Arcite, and train





THESEUS This way the stag took.

SCHOOLMASTER Stay and edify.

THESEUS What have we here?

PIRITHOUS

Some country sport, upon my life, sir.

THESEUS (to the Schoolmaster)

Well, sir, go forward—we will edify.

Ladies, sit down—we’ll stay it.

They sit: ⌈theseus⌉ in a chair, the others on stools





SCHOOLMASTER

Thou doughty Duke, all hail! All hail, sweet ladies.

THESEUS This is a cold beginning.

SCHOOLMASTER

If you but favour, our country pastime made is.

We are a few of those collected here,

That ruder tongues distinguish ‘villager’;

And to say verity, and not to fable,

We are a merry rout, or else a rabble,

Or company, or, by a figure, chorus,

That fore thy dignity will dance a morris.

And I, that am the rectifier of all,

By title pedagogus, that let fall

The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,

And humble with a ferula the tall ones,

Do here present this machine, or this frame;

And dainty Duke, whose doughty dismal fame

From Dis to Daedalus, from post to pillar,

Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,

And with thy twinkling eyes, look right and straight

Upon this mighty ‘Moor’—of mickle weight—

‘Ice’ now comes in, which, being glued together,

Makes ‘morris’, and the cause that we came hither.

The body of our sport, of no small study,

I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,

To speak, before thy noble grace, this tenor

At whose great feet I offer up my penner.

The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright;

The Chambermaid and Servingman, by night

That seek out silent hanging; then mine Host

And his fat Spouse, that welcomes, to their cost,

The galled traveller, and with a beck’ning

Informs the tapster to inflame the reck‘ning;

Then the beest-eating Clown; and next, the Fool;

The babion with long tail and eke long tool,

Cum multis aliis that make a dance—

Say ‘ay’, and all shall presently advance.

THESEUS

Ay, ay, by any means, dear dominie.

PIRITHOUS Produce.

SCHOOLMASTER (knocks for the dance)

Intrate filii, come forth and foot it.

⌈He flings up his cap.⌉ Music.

⌈The Schoolmaster ushers in

May Lord,

Servingman,

A Country Clown,

or Shepherd,

An Host,

A He-babion,

May Lady.

Chambermaid.



Country Wench.

Hostess.

She-babion.

A He-fool, The Jailer’s Daughter as

She-fool.



All these persons apparelled to the life, the men issuing out of one door and the wenches from the other. They dance a morris⌉



Ladies, if we have been merry,

And have pleased ye with a derry,

And a derry, and a down,

Say the schoolmaster’s no clown.

Duke, if we have pleased thee too,

And have done as good boys should do,

Give us but a tree or twain

For a maypole, and again,

Ere another year run out,

We’ll make thee laugh, and all this rout.





THESEUS

Take twenty, dominie. (To Hippolyta) How does my sweetheart?

HIPPOLYTA

Never so pleased, sir.

EMILIA

’Twas an excellent dance,

And for a preface, I never heard a better.

THESEUS

Schoolmaster, I thank you. One see ’em all rewarded.

PIRITHOUS

And here’s something to paint your pole withal.

He gives them money





THESEUS Now to our sports again.

SCHOOLMASTER

May the stag thou hunt’st stand long,

And thy dogs be swift and strong;

May they kill him without lets,

And the ladies eat his dowsets.





Exeunt Theseus and train. Wind horns within

Come, we are all made. Dii deaeque omnes,

Ye have danced rarely, wenches.

Exeunt





3.6 Enter Palamon from the bush



PALAMON

About this hour my cousin gave his faith

To visit me again, and with him bring

Two swords and two good armours; if he fail,

He’s neither man nor soldier. When he left me,

I did not think a week could have restored

My lost strength to me, I was grown so low

And crest-fall’n with my wants. I thank thee, Arcite,

Thou art yet a fair foe, and I feel myself,

With this refreshing, able once again

To out-dure danger. To delay it longer

Would make the world think, when it comes to

hearing,

That I lay fatting, like a swine, to fight,

And not a soldier. Therefore this blest morning

Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,

If it but hold, I kill him with; ’tis justice.

So, love and fortune for me!

Enter Arcite with two armours and two swords





O, good morrow.

ARCITE

Good morrow, noble kinsman.

PALAMON

I have put you

To too much pains, sir.

ARCITE

That too much, fair cousin,

Is but a debt to honour, and my duty.

PALAMON

Would you were so in all, sir—I could wish ye

As kind a kinsman, as you force me find

A beneficial foe, that my embraces

Might thank ye, not my blows.

ARCITE

I shall think either,

Well done, a noble recompense.

PALAMON

Then I shall quit you.

ARCITE

Defy me in these fair terms, and you show

More than a mistress to me—no more anger,

As you love anything that’s honourable.

We were not bred to talk, man. When we are armed

And both upon our guards, then let our fury,

Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us;

And then to whom the birthright of this beauty

Truly pertains—without upbraidings, scorns,

Despisings of our persons, and such poutings

Fitter for girls and schoolboys—will be seen,

And quickly, yours or mine. Will’t please you arm,

sir?

Or, if you feel yourself not fitting yet,

And furnished with your old strength, I’ll stay,

cousin,

And every day discourse you into health,

As I am spared. Your person I am friends with,

And I could wish I had not said I loved her,

Though I had died; but loving such a lady,

And justifying my love, I must not fly from’t.

PALAMON

Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy

That no man but thy cousin’s fit to kill thee.

I am well and lusty—choose your arms.

ARCITE Choose you, sir.

PALAMON

Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it

To make me spare thee?

ARCITE

If you think so, cousin,

You are deceived, for as I am a soldier,

I will not spare you.

PALAMON

That’s well said.

ARCITE

You’ll find it.

PALAMON

Then as I am an honest man, and love

With all the justice of affection,

I’ll pay thee soundly.

He chooses one armour





This I’ll take.

ARCITE (indicating the remaining armour)

That’s mine, then.

I’ll arm you first.

PALAMON

Do.

Arcite arms Palamon





Pray thee tell me, cousin,

Where gott’st thou this good armour?

ARCITE

‘Tis the Duke’s,

And to say true, I stole it. Do I pinch you?

PALAMON

No.

ARCITE

Is’t not too heavy?

PALAMON

I have worn a lighter—

But I shall make it serve.

ARCITE

I’ll buckle’t close.

PALAMON

By any means.

ARCITE

You care not for a grand guard?

PALAMON

No, no, we’ll use no horses. I perceive

You would fain be at that fight.

ARCITE

I am indifferent.

PALAMON

Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle

Through far enough.

ARCITE

I warrant you.

PALAMON

My casque now.

ARCITE

Will you fight bare-armed?

PALAMON We shall be the nimbler.

ARCITE

But use your gauntlets, though—those are o’th’ least.

Prithee take mine, good cousin.

PALAMON

Thank you, Arcite.

How do I look? Am I fall’n much away?

ARCITE

Faith, very little—love has used you kindly.

PALAMON

I’ll warrant thee, I’ll strike home.

ARCITE

Do, and spare not—

I’ll give you cause, sweet cousin.

PALAMON Now to you, sir.

Palamon arms Arcite





Methinks this armour’s very like that, Arcite,

Thou wor’st that day the three kings fell, but lighter.

ARCITE

That was a very good one, and that day,

I well remember, you outdid me, cousin.

I never saw such valour. When you charged

Upon the left wing of the enemy,

I spurred hard to come up, and under me

I had a right good horse.

PALAMON

You had indeed—

A bright bay, I remember.

ARCITE

Yes. But all

Was vainly laboured in me—you outwent me,

Nor could my wishes reach you. Yet a little

I did by imitation.

PALAMON

More by virtue—

You are modest, cousin.

ARCITE

When I saw you charge first,

Methought I heard a dreadful clap of thunder

Break from the troop.

PALAMON

But still before that flew

The lightning of your valour. Stay a little,

Is not this piece too strait?

ARCITE

No, no, ’tis well.

PALAMON

I would have nothing hurt thee but my sword—

A bruise would be dishonour.

ARCITE

Now I am perfect.

PALAMON

Stand off, then.

ARCITE

Take my sword; I hold it better.

PALAMON

I thank ye. No, keep it—your life lies on it.

Here’s one—if it but hold, I ask no more

For all my hopes. My cause and honour guard me.

ARCITE

And me, my love.

They bow several ways, then advance and stand



Is there aught else to say?





PALAMON

This only, and no more. Thou art mine aunt’s son,

And that blood we desire to shed is mutual:

In me, thine, and in thee, mine. My sword

Is in my hand, and if thou kill’st me,

The gods and I forgive thee. If there be

A place prepared for those that sleep in honour,

I wish his weary soul that falls may win it.

Fight bravely, cousin. Give me thy noble hand.

ARCITE

Here, Palamon. This hand shall never more

Come near thee with such friendship.

PALAMON

I commend thee.

ARCITE

If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward—

For none but such dare die in these just trials.

Once more farewell, my cousin.

PALAMON

Farewell, Arcite.

Fight. Horns within; they stand





ARCITE

Lo, cousin, lo, our folly has undone us.

PALAMON

Why?

ARCITE

This is the Duke a-hunting, as I told you.

If we be found, we are wretched. O, retire,

For honour’s sake, and safely, presently,

Into your bush again. Sir, we shall find

Too many hours to die. In, gentle cousin—

If you be seen, you perish instantly

For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,

For my contempt. Then all the world will scorn us,

And say we had a noble difference,

But base disposers of it.

PALAMON

No, no, cousin,

I will no more be hidden, nor put off

This great adventure to a second trial.

I know your cunning and I know your cause—

He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself

Upon thy present guard—

ARCITE

You are not mad?

PALAMON

Or I will make th’advantage of this hour

Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me

I fear less than my fortune. Know, weak cousin,

I love Emilia, and in that I’ll bury

Thee and all crosses else.

ARCITE

Then come what can come,

Thou shalt know, Palamon, I dare as well

Die as discourse or sleep. Only this fears me,

The law will have the honour of our ends.

Have at thy life!

PALAMON

Look to thine own well, Arcite!

They fight again.



Horns. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, Pirithous, and train. ⌈Theseus⌉ separates Palamon and Arcite





THESEUS

What ignorant and mad malicious traitors

Are you, that ’gainst the tenor of my laws

Are making battle, thus like knights appointed,

Without my leave and officers of arms?

By Castor, both shall die.

PALAMON

Hold thy word, Theseus.

We are certainly both traitors, both despisers

Of thee and of thy goodness. I am Palamon,

That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison—

Think well what that deserves. And this is Arcite;

A bolder traitor never trod thy ground,

A falser ne’er seemed friend. This is the man

Was begged and banished; this is he contemns thee,

And what thou dar’st do; and in this disguise,

Against thine own edict, follows thy sister,

That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia,

Whose servant—if there be a right in seeing

And first bequeathing of the soul to—justly

I am; and, which is more, dares think her his.

This treachery, like a most trusty lover,

I called him now to answer. If thou be’st

As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,

The true decider of all injuries,

Say, ’Fight again’, and thou shalt see me, Theseus,

Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy.

Then take my life—I’ll woo thee to’t.

PIRITHOUS

O heaven,

What more than man is this!

THESEUS

I have sworn.

ARCITE

We seek not

Thy breath of mercy, Theseus. ‘Tis to me

A thing as soon to die as thee to say it,

And no more moved. Where this man calls me traitor

Let me say thus much—if in love be treason,

In service of so excellent a beauty,

As I love most, and in that faith will perish,

As I have brought my life here to confirm it,

As I have served her truest, worthiest,

As I dare kill this cousin that denies it,

So let me be most traitor and ye please me.

For scorning thy edict, Duke, ask that lady

Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me

Stay here to love her, and if she say, ‘Traitor’,

I am a villain fit to lie unburied.

PALAMON

Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,

If unto neither thou show mercy. Stop,

As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;

As thou art valiant, for thy cousin’s soul,

Whose twelve strong labours crown his memory,

Let’s die together, at one instant, Duke.

Only a little let him fall before me,

That I may tell my soul he shall not have her.

THESEUS

I grant your wish; for to say true, your cousin

Has ten times more offended, for I gave him

More mercy than you found, sir, your offences

Being no more than his. None here speak for ’em,

For ere the sun set both shall sleep for ever.

HIPPOLYTA (to Emilia)

Alas, the pity! Now or never, sister,

Speak, not to be denied. That face of yours

Will bear the curses else of after ages

For these lost cousins.

EMILIA

In my face, dear sister,

I find no anger to ’em, nor no ruin.

The misadventure of their own eyes kill ’em.

Yet that I will be woman and have pity,

⌈She kneels⌉



My knees shall grow to th’ ground, but I’ll get mercy.

Help me, dear sister—in a deed so virtuous

The powers of all women will be with us.

Hippolyta kneels





Most royal brother—

HIPPOLYTA

Sir, by our tie of marriage—

EMILIA

By your own spotless honour—

HIPPOLYTA

By that faith,

That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me—

EMILIA

By that you would have pity in another,

By your own virtues infinite—

HIPPOLYTA

By valour,

By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you—

THESEUS

These are strange conjurings.

PIRITHOUS

Nay, then, I’ll in too.

⌈He kneels⌉





By all our friendship, sir, by all our dangers,

By all you love most: wars, and this sweet lady—

EMILIA

By that you would have trembled to deny

A blushing maid—

HIPPOLYTA

By your own eyes, by strength—

In which you swore I went beyond all women,

Almost all men—and yet I yielded, Theseus—

PIRITHOUS

To crown all this, by your most noble soul,

Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first—

HIPPOLYTA

Next hear my prayers—

EMILIA

Last let me entreat, sir—

PIRITHOUS

For mercy.

HIPPOLYTA Mercy.

EMILIA

Mercy on these princes.

THESEUS

Ye make my faith reel. Say I felt

Compassion to ’em both, how would you place it?

⌈They rise⌉





EMILIA

Upon their lives—but with their banishments.

THESEUS

You are a right woman, sister: you have pity,

But want the understanding where to use it.

If you desire their lives, invent a way

Safer than banishment. Can these two live,

And have the agony of love about ‘em,

And not kill one another? Every day

They’d fight about you, hourly bring your honour

In public question with their swords. Be wise, then,

And here forget ’em. It concerns your credit

And my oath equally. I have said—they die.

Better they fall by th’ law than one another.

Bow not my honour.

EMILIA

O my noble brother,

That oath was rashly made, and in your anger.

Your reason will not hold it. If such vows

Stand for express will, all the world must perish.

Beside, I have another oath ’gainst yours,

Of more authority, I am sure more love—

Not made in passion, neither, but good heed.

THESEUS

What is it, sister?

PIRITHOUS (to Emilia) Urge it home, brave lady.

EMILIA

That you would ne’er deny me anything

Fit for my modest suit and your free granting.

I tie you to your word now; if ye fail in’t,

Think how you maim your honour—

For now I am set a-begging, sir. I am deaf

To all but your compassion—how their lives

Might breed the ruin of my name, opinion.

Shall anything that loves me perish for me?

That were a cruel wisdom: do men prune

The straight young boughs that blush with thousand

blossoms

Because they may be rotten? O, Duke Theseus,

The goodly mothers that have groaned for these,

And all the longing maids that ever loved,

If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,

And in their funeral songs for these two cousins

Despise my cruelty and cry woe worth me,

Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.

For heaven’s sake, save their lives and banish ’em.

THESEUS

On what conditions?

EMILIA

Swear ’em never more To make me their contention, or to know me,

To tread upon thy dukedom; and to be,

Wherever they shall travel, ever strangers

To one another.

PALAMON

I’ll be cut a-pieces

Before I take this oath—forget I love her?

O all ye gods, despise me, then. Thy banishment

I not mislike, so we may fairly carry

Our swords and cause along—else, never trifle,

But take our lives, Duke. I must love, and will;

And for that love must and dare kill this cousin

On any piece the earth has.

THESEUS

Will you, Arcite,

Take these conditions?

PALAMON

He’s a villain then.

PIRITHOUS

These are men!

ARCITE

No, never, Duke. ’Tis worse to me than begging,

To take my life so basely. Though I think

I never shall enjoy her, yet I’ll preserve

The honour of affection and die for her,

Make death a devil.

THESEUS

What may be done? For now I feel compassion.

PIRITHOUS

Let it not fall again, sir.

THESEUS

Say, Emilia, If one of them were dead—as one must—are you

Content to take the other to your husband?

They cannot both enjoy you. They are princes

As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble

As ever fame yet spoke of. Look upon ’em,

And if you can love, end this difference.

I give consent. (To Palamon and Arcite) Are you

content too, princes?

PALAMON and ARCITE

With all our souls.

THESEUS

He that she refuses

Must die, then.

PALAMON and ARCITE

Any death thou canst invent, Duke.

PALAMON

If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour,

And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.

ARCITE

If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,

And soldiers sing my epitaph.

THESEUS (to Emilia)

Make choice, then.

EMILIA

I cannot, sir. They are both too excellent.

For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.

HIPPOLYTA ⌈to Theseus⌉

What will become of ’em?

THESEUS

Thus I ordain it, And by mine honour once again it stands,

Or both shall die. (To Palamon and Arcite) You shall

both to your country,

And each within this month, accompanied

With three fair knights, appear again in this place,

In which I’ll plant a pyramid; and whether,

Before us that are here, can force his cousin,

By fair and knightly strength, to touch the pillar,

He shall enjoy her; the other lose his head,

And all his friends; nor shall he grudge to fall,

Nor think he dies with interest in this lady.

Will this content ye?

PALAMON

Yes. Here, cousin Arcite,

I am friends again till that hour.

ARCITE

I embrace ye.

THESEUS (to Emilia)

Are you content, sister?

EMILIA

Yes, I must, sir,

Else both miscarry.

THESEUS (to Palamon and Arcite)

Come, shake hands again, then,

And take heed, as you are gentlemen, this quarrel

Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course.

PALAMON

We dare not fail thee, Theseus.

THESEUS

Come, I’ll give ye

Now usage like to princes and to friends.

When ye return, who wins I’ll settle here,

Who loses, yet I’ll weep upon his bier.

Exeunt. ⌈ln the act-time the bush is removed⌉





4.1 Enter the Jailer and his Friend



JAILER

Hear you no more? Was nothing said of me

Concerning the escape of Palamon?

Good sir, remember.

FRIEND

Nothing that I heard,

For I came home before the business

Was fully ended. Yet I might perceive,

Ere I departed, a great likelihood

Of both their pardons: for Hippolyta

And fair-eyed Emily upon their knees

Begged with such handsome pity that the Duke,

Methought, stood staggering whether he should

follow

His rash oath or the sweet compassion

Of those two ladies; and to second them

That truly noble prince, Pirithous—

Half his own heart—set in too, that I hope

All shall be well. Neither heard I one question

Of your name or his scape.

Enter the Second Friend





JAILER Pray heaven it hold so.

SECOND FRIEND

Be of good comfort, man. I bring you news,

Good news.

JAILER

They are welcome.

SECOND FRIEND

Palamon has cleared you,

And got your pardon, and discovered how

And by whose means he scaped—which was your

daughter’s,

Whose pardon is procured too; and the prisoner,

Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,

Has given a sum of money to her marriage—

A large one, I’ll assure you.

JAILER

Ye are a good man,

And ever bring good news.

FIRST FRIEND

How was it ended?

SECOND FRIEND

Why, as it should be: they that ne’er begged,

But they prevailed, had their suits fairly granted—

The prisoners have their lives.

FIRST FRIEND

I knew ’twould be so.

SECOND FRIEND

But there be new conditions which you’ll hear of

At better time.

JAILER

I hope they are good.

SECOND FRIEND

They are honourable—

How good they’ll prove I know not.

Enter the Wooer





EIRST ERIEND

’Twill be known.

WOOER

Alas, sir, where’s your daughter?

JAILER

Why do you ask?

WOOER

O, sir, when did you see her?

SECOND FRIEND

How he looks!

JAILER

This morning.

WOOER

Was she well? Was she in health?

Sir, when did she sleep?

FIRST FRIEND

These are strange questions.

JAILER

I do not think she was very well: for now

You make me mind her, but this very day

I asked her questions and she answered me

So far from what she was, so childishly,

So sillily, as if she were a fool,

An innocent—and I was very angry.

But what of her, sir?

WOOER

Nothing, but my pity

But you must know it, and as good by me

As by another that less loves her—

JAILER

Well, sir?

FIRST FRIEND Not right?

WOOER

No, sir, not well.

SECOND FRIEND

Not Well?

WOOER

’Tis too true—she is mad.

FIRST FRIEND

It cannot be.

WOOER

Believe, you’ll find it so.

JAILER

I half suspected

What you told me—the gods comfort her!

Either this was her love to Palamon,

Or fear of my miscarrying on his scape,

Or both.

WOOER

’Tis likely.

JAILER

But why all this haste, sir?

WOOER

I’ll tell you quickly. As I late was angling

In the great lake that lies behind the palace,

From the far shore, thick set with reeds and sedges,

As patiently I was attending sport,

I heard a voice—a shrill one—and attentive

I gave my ear, when I might well perceive

’Twas one that sung, and by the smallness of it

A boy or woman. I then left my angle

To his own skill, came near, but yet perceived not

Who made the sound, the rushes and the reeds

Had so encompassed it. I laid me down

And listened to the words she sung, for then,

Through a small glade cut by the fishermen,

I saw it was your daughter.

JAILER

Pray go on, sir.

WOOER

She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her

Repeat this often—‘Palamon is gone,

Is gone to th’ wood to gather mulberries;

I’ll find him out tomorrow.’

FIRST FRIEND

Pretty soul!

WOOER

‘His shackles will betray him—he’ll be taken,

And what shall I do then? I’ll bring a bevy,

A hundred black-eyed maids that love as I do,

With chaplets on their heads of daffodillies,

With cherry lips and cheeks of damask roses,

And all we’ll dance an antic fore the Duke

And beg his pardon.’ Then she talked of you, sir—

That you must lose your head tomorrow morning,

And she must gather flowers to bury you,

And see the house made handsome. Then she sung

Nothing but ‘willow, willow, willow’, and between

Ever was ‘Palamon, fair Palamon’,

And ‘Palamon was a tall young man’. The place

Was knee-deep where she sat; her careless tresses

A wreath of bull-rush rounded; about her stuck

Thousand freshwater flowers of several colours—

That she appeared, methought, like the fair nymph

That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris

Newly dropped down from heaven. Rings she made

Of rushes that grew by, and to ‘em spoke

The prettiest posies—‘Thus our true love’s tied’,

‘This you may lose, not me’, and many a one.

And then she wept, and sung again, and sighed—

And with the same breath smiled and kissed her

hand.

SECOND FRIEND

Alas, what pity it is!

WOOER

I made in to her:

She saw me and straight sought the flood—I saved

her,

And set her safe to land, when presently

She slipped away and to the city made,

With such a cry and swiftness that, believe me,

She left me far behind her. Three or four

I saw from far off cross her—one of ’em

I knew to be your brother, where she stayed

And fell, scarce to be got away. I left them with her,

Enter the Jailer’s Brother, the Jailer’s Daughter, and others





And hither came to tell you—here they are.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER (sings)

‘May you never more enjoy the light ...’—

Is not this a fine song?

JAILER’S BROTHER O, a very fine one.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I can sing twenty more.

JAILER’S BROTHER I think you can.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Yes, truly can I—I can sing ‘The Broom’

And ‘Bonny Robin’—are not you a tailor?

JAILER’S BROTHER

Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Where’s my wedding gown?

JAILER’s BROTHER

I’ll bring it tomorrow.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Do, very rarely—I must be abroad else,

To call the maids and pay the minstrels,

For I must lose my maidenhead by cocklight,

‘Twill never thrive else. (Sings) ‘O fair, O sweet ...’

JAILER’S BROTHER ⌈to the jailer⌉

You must e’en take it patiently.

JAILER

’Tis true.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Good ev’n, good men. Pray, did you ever hear

Of one young Palamon?

JAILER Yes, wench, we know him.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Is’t not a fine young gentleman?

JAILER

’Tis, love.

JAILER’S BROTHER

By no mean cross her, she is then distempered

Far worse than now she shows.

FIRST FRIEND (to the Jailer’s Daughter)

Yes, he’s a fine man.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

O, is he so? You have a sister.

FIRST FRIEND Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

But she shall never have him, tell her so,

For a trick that I know. You’d best look to her,

For if she see him once, she’s gone—she’s done

And undone in an hour. All the young maids

Of our town are in love with him, but I laugh at

’em

And let ’em all alone. Is’t not a wise course?

FIRST FRIEND

Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

There is at least two hundred now with child by him,

There must be four; yet I keep close for all this,

Close as a cockle; and all these must be boys—

He has the trick on’t—and at ten years old

They must be all gelt for musicians

And sing the wars of Theseus.

SECOND FRIEND

This is strange.

⌈JAILER’S BROTHER⌉

As ever you heard, but say nothing.

FIRST FRIEND

No.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

They come from all parts of the dukedom to him.

I’ll warrant ye, he had not so few last night

As twenty to dispatch. He’ll tickle’t up

In two hours, if his hand be in.

JAILER

She’s lost

Past all cure.

JAILER’S BROTHER Heaven forbid, man!

JAILER’S DAUGHTER (to the Jailer)

Come hither—you are a wise man.

FIRST FRIEND

Does she know him?

SECOND FRIEND

No—would she did.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER You are master of a ship?

JAILER

Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Where’s your compass?

JAILER

Here.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Set it to th’ north.

And now direct your course to th’ wood where

Palamon

Lies longing for me. For the tackling,

Let me alone. Come, weigh, my hearts, cheerly all.

Uff, uff, uff! ’Tis up. The wind’s fair. Top the bowline.

Out with the mainsail. Where’s your whistle, master?

JAILER’S BROTHER Let’s get her in.

JAILER

Up to the top, boy!

JAILER’S BROTHER

Where’s the pilot?

FIRST FRIEND

Here.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

What kenn’st thou?

SECOND FRIEND

A fair wood.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Bear for it, master.

Tack about!

(Sings) ‘When Cynthia with her borrowed light ...’

Exeunt





4.2 ⌈Enter Emilia, with two pictures⌉



EMILIA

Yet I may bind those wounds up that must open

And bleed to death for my sake else—I’ll choose,

And end their strife. Two such young handsome men

Shall never fall for me; their weeping mothers

Following the dead cold ashes of their sons,

Shall never curse my cruelty. Good heaven,

What a sweet face has Arcitel If wise nature,

With all her best endowments, all those beauties

She sows into the births of noble bodies,

Were here a mortal woman and had in her

The coy denials of young maids, yet doubtless

She would run mad for this man. What an eye,

Of what a fiery sparkle and quick sweetness

Has this young prince! Here love himself sits smiling!

Just such another wanton Ganymede

Set Jove afire once, and enforced the god

Snatch up the goodly boy and set him by him,

A shining constellation. What a brow,

Of what a spacious majesty, he carries!

Arched like the great-eyed Juno’s, but far sweeter,

Smoother than Pelops’ shoulder! Fame and honour,

Methinks, from hence, as from a promontory

Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings and sing

To all the under world the loves and fights

Of gods, and such men near ’em. Palamon

Is but his foil; to him a mere dull shadow;

He’s swart and meagre, of an eye as heavy

As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,

No stirring in him, no alacrity,

Of all this sprightly sharpness, not a smile.

Yet these that we count errors may become him:

Narcissus was a sad boy, but a heavenly.

O, who can find the bent of woman’s fancy?

I am a fool, my reason is lost in me,

I have no choice, and I have lied so lewdly

That women ought to beat me. On my knees

I ask thy pardon, Palamon, thou art alone

And only beautiful, and these the eyes,

These the bright lamps of beauty, that command

And threaten love—and what young maid dare cross

’em?

What a bold gravity, and yet inviting,

Has this brown manly face? O, love, this only

From this hour is complexion. Lie there, Arcite,

Thou art a changeling to him, a mere gypsy,

And this the noble body. I am sotted,

Utterly lost—my virgin’s faith has fled me.

For if my brother, but even now, had asked me

Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite;

Now if my sister, more for Palamon.

Stand both together. Now come ask me, brother—

Alas, I know not; ask me now, sweet sister—

I may go look. What a mere child is fancy,

That having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,

Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both!

⌈Enter a Gentlemanl⌉





How now, sir?

GENTLEMAN

From the noble Duke your brother,

Madam, I bring you news. The knights are come.

EMILIA

To end the quarrel?

GENTLEMAN

Yes.

EMILIA

Would I might end first!

What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,

That my unspotted youth must now be soiled

With blood of princes, and my chastity

Be made the altar where the lives of lovers—

Two greater and two better never yet

Made mothers joy—must be the sacrifice

To my unhappy beauty?

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous, and attendants





THESEUS

Bring ’em in

Quickly, by any means, I long to see ’em.

Exit one or more

(To Emilia) Your two contending lovers are returned,

And with them their fair knights. Now, my fair sister,

You must love one of them.

EMILIA

I had rather both,

So neither for my sake should fall untimely.

Enter a Messenger





THESEUS

Who saw ’em?

PIRITHOUS

I a while.

GENTLEMAN

And I.

THESEUS (to the Messenger)

From whence come you, sir?

MESSENGER

From the knights.

THESEUS

Pray speak,

You that have seen them, what they are.

MESSENGER

I will, sir,

And truly what I think. Six braver spirits

Than these they have brought, if we judge by the

outside,

I never saw nor read of. He that stands

In the first place with Arcite, by his seeming,

Should be a stout man; by his face, a prince.

His very looks so say him: his complexion,

Nearer a brown than black, stern and yet noble,

Which shows him hardy, fearless, proud of dangers.

The circles of his eyes show fire within him,

And, as a heated lion, so he looks.

His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining,

Like ravens’ wings. His shoulders, broad and strong;

Armed long and round; and on his thigh a sword

Hung by a curious baldric, when he frowns

To seal his will with. Better, o’ my conscience,

Was never soldier’s friend.

THESEUS Thou hast well described him.

PIRITHOUS

Yet a great deal short,

Methinks, of him that’s first with Palamon.

THESEUS

Pray speak him, friend.

PIRITHOUS

I guess he is a prince too,

And, if it may be, greater—for his show

Has all the ornament of honour in’t.

He’s somewhat bigger than the knight he spoke of,

But of a face far sweeter. His complexion

Is as a ripe grape, ruddy. He has felt,

Without doubt, what he fights for, and so apter

To make this cause his own. In’s face appears

All the fair hopes of what he undertakes,

And when he’s angry, then a settled valour,

Not tainted with extremes, runs through his body

And guides his arm to brave things. Fear he cannot—

He shows no such soft temper. His head’s yellow,

Hard-haired and curled, thick twined: like ivy tods,

Not to undo with thunder. In his face

The livery of the warlike maid appears,

Pure red and white—for yet no beard has blessed

him—

And in his rolling eyes sits victory,

As if she ever meant to court his valour.

His nose stands high, a character of honour;

His red lips, after fights, are fit for ladies.

EMILIA

Must these men die too?

PIRITHOUS

When he speaks, his tongue

Sounds like a trumpet. All his lineaments

Are as a man would wish ’em—strong and clean.

He wears a well-steeled axe, the staff of gold.

His age, some five-and-twenty.

MESSENGER

There’s another—

A little man, but of a tough soul, seeming

As great as any. Fairer promises

In such a body yet I never looked on.

PIRITHOUS

O, he that’s freckle-faced?

MESSENGER

The same, my lord.

Are they not sweet ones?

PIRITHOUS

Yes, they are well.

MESSENGER

Methinks,

Being so few and well disposed, they show

Great and fine art in nature. He’s white-haired—

Not wanton white, but such a manly colour

Next to an auburn, tough and nimble set,

Which shows an active soul. His arms are brawny,

Lined with strong sinews—to the shoulder piece

Gently they swell, like women new-conceived,

Which speaks him prone to labour, never fainting

Under the weight of arms; stout-hearted, still,

But when he stirs, a tiger. He’s grey-eyed,

Which yields compassion where he conquers; sharp

To spy advantages, and where he finds ’em,

He’s swift to make ’em his. He does no wrongs,

Nor takes none. He’s round-faced, and when he smiles

He shows a lover; when he frowns, a soldier.

About his head he wears the winner’s oak,

And in it stuck the favour of his lady.

His age, some six-and-thirty. In his hand

He bears a charging staff embossed with silver.

THESEUS

Are they all thus?

PIRITHOUS

They are all the sons of honour.

THESEUS

Now as I have a soul, I long to see ’em.

(To Hippolyta) Lady, you shall see men fight now.

HIPPOLYTA

I Wish it,

But not the cause, my lord. They would show

Bravely about the titles of two kingdoms—

’Tis pity love should be so tyrannous.

(To Emilia) O my soft-hearted sister, what think you?

Weep not till they weep blood. Wench, it must be.

THESEUS (to Emilia)

You have steeled ’em with your beauty.

(To Pirithous)

Honoured friend, To you I give the field: pray order it

Fitting the persons that must use it.

PIRITHOUS

Yes, sir.

THESEUS

Come, I’ll go visit ’em—I cannot stay,

Their fame has fired me so. Till they appear,

Good friend, be royal.

PIRITHOUS There shall want no bravery.

EMILIA ⌈aside⌉

Poor wench, go weep—for whosoever wins

Loses a noble cousin for thy sins.

Exeunt





4.3 Enter the Jailer, the Wooer, and the Doctor



DOCTOR Her distraction is more at some time of the moon than at other some, is it not?

JAILER She is continually in a harmless distemper: sleeps little; altogether without appetite, save often drinking; dreaming of another world, and a better; and what broken piece of matter soe’er she’s about, the name ’Palamon’ lards it, that she farces every business

Enter the Jailer’s Daughter



withal, fits it to every question. Look where she comes—you shall perceive her behaviour.

They stand apart





JAILER’S DAUGHTER I have forgot it quite—the burden on’t was ‘Down-a, down-a’, and penned by no worse man than Giraldo, Emilia’s schoolmaster. He’s as fantastical, too, as ever he may go upon’s legs—for in the next world will Dido see Palamon, and then will she be out of love with Aeneas.

DOCTOR What stuff’s here? Poor soul.

JAILER E’en thus all day long.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Now for this charm that I told you of—you must bring a piece of silver on the tip of your tongue, or no ferry: then, if it be your chance to come where the blessed spirits are—there’s a sight now! We maids that have our livers perished, cracked to pieces with love, we shall come there and do nothing all day long but pick flowers with Proserpine. Then will I make Palamon a nosegay, then let him mark me, then—

DOCTOR How prettily she’s amiss! Note her a little further.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Faith, I’ll tell you: sometime we go to barley-break, we of the blessed. Alas, ’tis a sore life they have i’th’ other place—such burning, frying, boiling, hissing, howling, chattering, cursing—O they have shrewd measure—take heed! If one be mad or hang or drown themselves, thither they go, Jupiter bless us, and there shall we be put in a cauldron of lead and usurers’ grease, amongst a whole million of cutpurses, and there boil like a gammon of bacon that will never be enough.

DOCTOR How her brain coins!

JAILER’S DAUGHTER Lords and courtiers that have got maids with child—they are in this place. They shall stand in fire up to the navel and in ice up to th’ heart, and there th’offending part burns, and the deceiving part freezes—in truth a very grievous punishment as one would think for such a trifle. Believe me, one would marry a leprous witch to be rid on’t, I’ll assure you.

DOCTOR How she continues this fancy! ’Tis not an engrafted madness, but a most thick and profound melancholy.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER To hear there a proud lady and a proud city wife howl together! I were a beast an I’d call it good sport. One cries, ‘O this smoke!’, th‘other, ‘This fire!’; one cries, ‘O that ever I did it behind the arras!’, and then howls—th’other curses a suing fellow and her garden-house.

(Sings) ‘I will be true, my stars, my fate . . .’

Exit Daughter

JAILER (to the Doctor) What think you of her, sir?

DOCTOR I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.

JAILER Alas, what then?

DOCTOR Understand you she ever affected any man ere she beheld Palamon?

JAILER I was once, sir, in great hope she had fixed her liking on this gentleman, my friend.

WOOER I did think so too, and would account I had a great penn’orth on’t to give half my state that both she and I, at this present, stood unfeignedly on the same terms. 66

DOCTOR That intemperate surfeit of her eye hath distempered the other senses. They may return and settle again to execute their preordained faculties, but they are now in a most extravagant vagary. This you must do: confine her to a place where the light may rather seem to steal in than be permitted; take upon you, young sir her friend, the name of Palamon; say you come to eat with her and to commune of love. This will catch her attention, for this her mind beats upon—other objects that are inserted ’tween her mind and eye become the pranks and friskins of her madness. Sing to her such green songs of love as she says Palamon hath sung in prison; come to her stuck in as sweet flowers as the season is mistress of, and thereto make an addition of some other compounded odours which are grateful to the sense. All this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can sing, and Palamon is sweet and every good thing. Desire to eat with her, carve her, drink to her, and still among intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance into her favour. Learn what maids have been her companions and playferes, and let them repair to her, with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with tokens as if they suggested for him. It is a falsehood she is in, which is with falsehoods to be combated. This may bring her to eat, to sleep, and reduce what’s now out of square in her into their former law and regiment. I have seen it approved, how many times I know not, but to make the number more I have great hope in this. I will between the passages of this project come in with my appliance. Let us put it in execution, and hasten the success, which doubt not will bring forth comfort.

Exeunt





5.1 ⌈An altar prepared.⌉ Flourish. Enter Theseus, Pirithous, Hippolyta, attendants



THESEUS

Now let ’em enter and before the gods

Tender their holy prayers. Let the temples

Burn bright with sacred fires, and the altars

In hallowed clouds commend their swelling incense

To those above us. Let no due be wanting.

Flourish of cornetts





They have a noble work in hand, will honour

The very powers that love ’em.

Enter Palamon with his three Knights ⌈at one door⌉, and Arcite with his three Knights ⌈at the other door⌉





PIRITHOUS

Sir, they enter.

THESEUS

You valiant and strong-hearted enemies,

You royal german foes that this day come

To blow that nearness out that flames between ye,

Lay by your anger for an hour and, dove-like,

Before the holy altars of your helpers,

The all-feared gods, bow down your stubborn bodies.

Your ire is more than mortal—so your help be;

And as the gods regard ye, fight with justice.

I’ll leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye

I part my wishes.

PIRITHOUS

Honour crown the worthiest.

Exit Theseus and his train

PALAMON (to Arcite)

The glass is running now that cannot finish

Till one of us expire. Think you but thus,

That were there aught in me which strove to show

Mine enemy in this business, were’t one eye

Against another, arm oppressed by arm,

I would destroy th’offender—coz, I would,

Though parcel of myself. Then from this gather

How I should tender you.

ARCITE

I am in labour

To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred,

Out of my memory, and i’th’ selfsame place

To seat something I would confound. So hoist we

The sails that must these vessels port even where

The heavenly limiter pleases.

PALAMON

You speak well.

Before I turn, let me embrace thee, cousin—

This I shall never do again.

ARCITE One farewell.

PALAMON

Why, let it be so—farewell, coz.

ARCITE

Farewell, sir.

Exeunt Palamon and his three Knights

Knights, kinsmen, lovers—yea, my sacrifices,

True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you

Expels the seeds of fear and th’apprehension

Which still is father of it, go with me

Before the god of our profession. There

Require of him the hearts of lions and

The breath of tigers, yea, the fierceness too,

Yea, the speed also—to go on, I mean,

Else wish we to be snails. You know my prize

Must be dragged out of blood—force and great feat

Must put my garland on me, where she sticks,

The queen of flowers. Our intercession, then,

Must be to him that makes the camp a cistern

Brimmed with the blood of men—give me your aid,

And bend your spirits towards him.

They kneel before the altar, ⌈fall on their faces, then on their knees again⌉





(Praying to Mars)

Thou mighty one,

That with thy power hast turned green Neptune into

purple;

Whose havoc in vast field comets prewarn,

Unearthed skulls proclaim; whose breath blows down

The teeming Ceres’ foison; who dost pluck

With hand armipotent from forth blue clouds

The masoned turrets, that both mak’st and break’st

The stony girths of cities; me thy pupil,

Youngest follower of thy drum, instruct this day

With military skill, that to thy laud

I may advance my streamer, and by thee

Be styled the lord o’th’ day. Give me, great Mars,

Some token of thy pleasure.

Here they fall on their faces, as formerly, and there is heard clanging of armour, with a short thunder, as the burst of a battle, whereupon they all rise and bow to the altar





O great corrector of enormous times,

Shaker of o’er-rank states, thou grand decider

Of dusty and old titles, that heal’st with blood

The earth when it is sick, and cur’st the world

O’th’ plurisy of people, I do take

Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name,

To my design, march boldly. (To his Knights) Let us go.

Exeunt





5.2 Enter Palamon and his Knights with the former observance



PALAMON (to his Knights)

Our stars must glister with new fire, or be

Today extinct. Our argument is love,

Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives

Victory too. Then blend your spirits with mine,

You whose free nobleness do make my cause

Your personal hazard. To the goddess Venus

Commend we our proceeding, and implore

Her power unto our party.

Here they kneel before the altar, fall on’their faces then on their knees again





(Praying to Venus) Hail, sovereign queen of secrets,

who hast power

To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage

And weep unto a girl; that hast the might,

Even with an eye-glance, to choke Mars’s drum

And turn th‘alarum to whispers; that canst make

A cripple flourish with his crutch, and cure him

Before Apollo; that mayst force the king

To be his subject’s vassal, and induce

Stale gravity to dance; the polled bachelor

Whose youth, like wanton boys through bonfires,

Have skipped thy flame, at seventy thou canst catch

And make him to the scorn of his hoarse throat

Abuse young lays of love. What godlike power

Hast thou not power upon? To Phoebus thou

Add’st flames hotter than his—the heavenly fires

Did scorch his mortal son, thine him. The huntress,

All moist and cold, some say, began to throw

Her bow away and sigh. Take to thy grace

Me, thy vowed soldier, who do bear thy yoke

As ’twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier

Than lead itself, stings more than nettles.

I have never been foul-mouthed against thy law;

Ne’er revealed secret, for I knew none; would not,

Had I kenned all that were. I never practised

Upon man’s wife, nor would the libels read

Of liberal wits. I never at great feasts

Sought to betray a beauty, but have blushed

At simp’ring sirs that did. I have been harsh

To large confessors, and have hotly asked them

If they had mothers—I had one, a woman,

And women ’twere they wronged. I knew a man

Of eighty winters, this I told them, who

A lass of fourteen brided—’twas thy power

To put life into dust. The aged cramp

Had screwed his square foot round,

The gout had knit his fingers into knots,

Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes

Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life

In him seemed torture. This anatomy

Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I

Believed it was his, for she swore it was,

And who would not believe her? Brief—I am

To those that prate and have done, no companion;

To those that boast and have not, a defier;

To those that would and cannot, a rejoicer.

Yea, him I do not love that tells close offices

The foulest way, nor names concealments in

The boldest language. Such a one I am,

And vow that lover never yet made sigh

Truer than I. O, then, most soft sweet goddess,

Give me the victory of this question, which

Is true love’s merit, and bless me with a sign

Of thy great pleasure.

Here music is heard, doves are seen to flutter. They fall again upon their faces, then on their knees





O thou that from eleven to ninety reign’st

In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world

And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks

For this fair token, which, being laid unto

Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance

My body to this business. (To his Knights) Let us rise

And bow before the goddess.

They rise and bow





Time comes on.

Exeunt





5.3 Still music of recorders. Enter Emilia in white, her hair about her shoulders, with a wheaten wreath; one in white holding up her train, her hair stuck with flowers; one before her carrying a silver hind in which is conveyed incense and sweet odours, which being set upon the altar, her maids standing apart, she sets fire to it. Then they curtsy and kneel



EMILIA (praying to Diana)

O sacred, shadowy, cold, and constant queen,

Abandoner of revels, mute contemplative,

Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure

As wind-fanned snow, who to thy female knights

Allow’st no more blood than will make a blush,

Which is their order’s robe: I here, thy priest,

Am humbled fore thine altar. O, vouchsafe

With that thy rare green eye, which never yet

Beheld thing maculate, look on thy virgin;

And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear—

Which ne’er heard scurril term, into whose port

Ne‘er entered wanton sound—to my petition,

Seasoned with holy fear. This is my last

Of vestal office. I am bride-habited,

But maiden-hearted. A husband I have ’pointed,

But do not know him. Out of two, I should

Choose one and pray for his success, but I

Am guiltless of election. Of mine eyes

Were I to lose one, they are equal precious—

I could doom neither: that which perished should

Go to’t unsentenced. Therefore, most modest queen,

He of the two pretenders that best loves me

And has the truest title in’t, let him

Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant

The file and quality I hold I may

Continue in thy band.

Here the hind vanishes under the altar and in the place ascends a rose tree having one rose upon it





(To her women) See what our general of ebbs and flows

Out from the bowels of her holy altar,

With sacred act, advances—but one rose!

If well inspired, this battle shall confound

Both these brave knights, and I a virgin flower

Must grow alone, unplucked.

Here is heard a sudden twang of instruments and the rose falls from the tree





The flower is fall’n, the tree descends. (To Diana) O

mistress,

Thou here dischargest me—I shall be gathered.

I think so, but I know not thine own will.

Unclasp thy mystery. ⌈To her women⌉ I hope she’s

pleased;

Her signs were gracious.

They curtsy and exeunt





5.4 Enter the Doctor, the jailer, and the Wooer in the habit of Palamon



DOCTOR Has this advice I told you done any good upon her?

WOOER O, very much. The maids that kept her company have half persuaded her that I am Palamon. Within this half-hour she came smiling to me, and asked me what I would eat, and when I would kiss her. I told her presently, and kissed her twice.

DOCTOR

’Twas well done—twenty times had been far better,

For there the cure lies mainly.

WOOER

Then she told me

She would watch with me tonight, for well she knew

What hour my fit would take me.

DOCTOR

Let her do so, 11

And when your fit comes, fit her home,

And presently.

WOOER

She would have me sing.

DOCTOR

You did so?

WOOER

No.

DOCTOR

’Twas very ill done, then. You should observe her every way.

WOOER

Alas,

I have no voice, sir, to confirm her that way.

DOCTOR

That’s all one, if ye make a noise.

If she entreat again, do anything—

Lie with her if she ask you.

JAILER

Ho there, Doctor.

DOCTOR

Yes, in the way of cure.

JAILER

But first, by your leave,

I’th’ way of honesty.

DOCTOR

That’s but a niceness—

Ne’er cast your child away for honesty.

Cure her first this way, then if she will be honest,

She has the path before her.

JAILER

Thank ye, Doctor.

DOCTOR

Pray bring her in and let’s see how she is.

JAILER

I will, and tell her her Palamon stays for her.

But, Doctor, methinks you are i’th’ wrong still.

Exit Jailer

DOCTOR

Go, go. You fathers are fine fools—her honesty?

An we should give her physic till we find that—

WOOER

Why, do you think she is not honest, sir?

DOCTOR

How old is she?

WOOER

She’s eighteen.

DOCTOR

She may be—

But that’s all one. ’Tis nothing to our purpose.

Whate’er her father says, if you perceive

Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of,

Videlicet, the way of flesh—you have me?

WOOER

Yes, very well, sir.

DOCTOR

Please her appetite,

And do it home—it cures her, ipso facto,

The melancholy humour that infects her.

WOOER I am of your mind, Doctor.

Enter the Jailer and his Daughter, mad





DOCTOR

You’ll find it so—she comes: pray humour her.

⌈The Doctor and the Wooer stand apart⌉





JAILER (to his Daughter)

Come, your love Palamon stays for you, child,

And has done this long hour, to visit you.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I thank him for his gentle patience.

He’s a kind gentleman, and I am much bound to

him.

Did you ne’er see the horse he gave me?

JAILER

Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

How do you like him?

JAILER

He’s a very fair one.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

You never saw him dance?

JAILER

No.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

I have, often. He dances very finely, very comely,

And, for a jig, come cut and long-tail to him,

He turns ye like a top.

JAILER

That’s fine, indeed.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

He’ll dance the morris twenty mile an hour,

And that will founder the best hobbyhorse,

If I have any skill, in all the parish—

And gallops to the tune of ‘Light o’ love’.

What think you of this horse?

JAILER

Having these virtues

I think he might be brought to play at tennis.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Alas, that’s nothing.

JAILER

Can he write and read too?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

A very fair hand, and casts himself th’accounts

Of all his hay and provender. That ostler

Must rise betime that cozens him. You know

The chestnut mare the Duke has?

JAILER

Very well.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,

But he is like his master—coy and scornful.

JAILER

What dowry has she?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Some two hundred bottles

And twenty strike of oats, but he’ll ne’er have her.

He lisps in’s neighing, able to entice

A miller’s mare. He’ll be the death of her.

DOCTOR What stuff she utters!

JAILER Make curtsy—here your love comes.

WOOER (coming forward) Pretty soul,

How do ye?

She curtsies





That’s a fine maid, there’s a curtsy.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Yours to command, i’th’ way of honesty—

How far is’t now to th’ end o’th’ world, my masters?

DOCTOR

Why, a day’s journey, wench.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER (to Wooer) Will you go with me?

WOOER

What shall we do there, wench?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Why, play at stool-ball—

What is there else to do?

WOOER I am content

If we shall keep our wedding there.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

’Tis true—

For there, I will assure you, we shall find

Some blind priest for the purpose that will venture

To marry us, for here they are nice, and foolish.

Besides, my father must be hanged tomorrow,

And that would be a blot i’th’ business.

Are not you Palamon?

WOOER

Do not you know me?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Yes, but you care not for me. I have nothing

But this poor petticoat and two coarse smocks.

WOOER

That’s all one—I will have you.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Will you surely?

WOOER

Yes, by this fair hand, will I.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

We’ll to bed then.

WOOER

E’en when you will.

He kisses her





JAILER’S DAUGHTER (rubbing off the kiss)

O, sir, you would fain be nibbling.

WOOER

Why do you rub my kiss off?

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

’Tis a sweet one,

And will perfume me finely against the wedding. 90

(Indicating the Doctor) Is not this your cousin Arcite?

DOCTOR

Yes, sweetheart,

And I am glad my cousin Palamon

Has made so fair a choice.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

Do you think he’ll have me?

DOCTOR

Yes, without doubt.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER (to the Jailer) Do you think so too?

JAILER Yes.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

We shall have many children. ⌈To the Doctor⌉ Lord,

how you’re grown!

My Palamon, I hope, will grow too, finely,

Now he’s at liberty. Alas, poor chicken,

He was kept down with hard meat and ill lodging,

But I’ll kiss him up again.

Enter a Messenger





MESSENGER

What do you here? You’ll lose the noblest sight

That e’er was seen.

JAILER

Are they i’th’ field?

MESSENGER

They are—

You bear a charge there too.

JAILER

I’ll away straight.

⌈To the others⌉ I must e’en leave you here.

DOCTOR

Nay, we’ll go with you—

I will not lose the sight.

JAILER

How did you like her?

DOCTOR

I’ll warrant you, within these three or four days

I’ll make her right again.

⌈Exit the Jailer with the Messenger⌉

(To the Wooer) You must not from her,

But still preserve her in this way.

WOOER

I will.

DOCTOR

Let’s get her in.

WOOER (to the Jailer’s Daughter)

Come, sweet, we’ll go to dinner,

And then we’ll play at cards.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

And shall we kiss too?

WOOER

A hundred times.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER And twenty.

WOOER

Ay, and twenty. no

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

And then we’ll sleep together.

DOCTOR (to the Wooer)

Take her offer.

WOOER (to the Jailer’s Daughter)

Yes, marry, will we.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER

But you shall not hurt me.

WOOER

I will not, sweet.

JAILER’S DAUGHTER If you do, love, I’ll cry.

Exeunt





5.5 Flourish. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, Pirithous, and some attendants



EMILIA

I’ll no step further.

PIRITHOUS

Will you lose this sight?

EMILIA

I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly

Than this decision. Every blow that falls

Threats a brave life; each stroke laments

The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like

A bell than blade. I will stay here.

It is enough my hearing shall be punished

With what shall happen, ’gainst the which there is

No deafing, but to hear; not taint mine eye

With dread sights it may shun.

PIRITHOUS (to Theseus)

Sir, my good lord,

Your sister will no further.

THESEUS

O she must.

She shall see deeds of honour in their kind,

Which sometime show well pencilled. Nature now

Shall make and act the story, the belief

Both sealed with eye and ear. (To Emilia) You must be

present—

You are the victor’s meed, the price and garland

To crown the question’s title.

EMILIA

Pardon me,

If I were there I’d wink.

THESEUS

You must be there—

This trial is, as ’twere, i’th’ night, and you

The only star to shine.

EMILIA

I am extinct.

There is but envy in that light which shows

The one the other. Darkness, which ever was

The dam of horror, who does stand accursed

Of many mortal millions, may even now,

By casting her black mantle over both,

That neither could find other, get herself

Some part of a good name, and many a murder

Set off whereto she’s guilty.

HIPPOLYTA

You must go.

EMILIA

In faith, I will not.

THESEUS

Why, the knights must kindle

Their valour at your eye. Know, of this war

You are the treasure, and must needs be by

To give the service pay.

EMILIA

Sir, pardon me—

The title of a kingdom may be tried

Out of itself.

THESEUS

Well, well—then at your pleasure.

Those that remain with you could wish their office

To any of their enemies.

HIPPOLYTA

Farewell, sister. I am like to know your husband fore yourself,

By some small start of time. He whom the gods

Do of the two know best, I pray them he

Be made your lot.

Exeunt all but Emilia

⌈Emilia takes out two pictures, one from her right side, and one from her left⌉





EMILIA

Arcite is gently visaged, yet his eye

Is like an engine bent or a sharp weapon

In a soft sheath. Mercy and manly courage

Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon

Has a most menacing aspect. His brow

Is graved and seems to bury what it frowns on,

Yet sometime ’tis not so, but alters to

The quality of his thoughts. Long time his eye

Will dwell upon his object. Melancholy

Becomes him nobly—so does Arcite’s mirth.

But Palamon’s sadness is a kind of mirth,

So mingled as if mirth did make him sad

And sadness merry. Those darker humours that

Stick misbecomingly on others, on them

Live in fair dwelling.

Cornetts. Trumpets sound as to a charge





Hark, how yon spurs to spirit do incite

The princes to their proof. Arcite may win me,

And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to

The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity

Enough for such a chance! If I were by

I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes

Toward my seat, and in that motion might

Omit a ward or forfeit an offence

Which craved that very time. It is much better

Cornetts. A great cry and noise within, crying, ‘A Palamon’





I am not there. O better never born,

Than minister to such harm.

Enter Servant





What is the chance?

SERVANT The cry’s ‘A Palamon’.

EMILIA

Then he has won. ’Twas ever likely—

He looked all grace and success, and he is

Doubtless the prim’st of men. I prithee run

And tell me how it goes.

Shout and cornetts, crying, ‘A Palamon’





SERVANT

Still ‘Palamon’.

EMILIA

Run and enquire.

Exit Servant

⌈She speaks to the picture in her right hand⌉





Poor servant, thou hast lost.

Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,

Palamon’s on the left. Why so, I know not.

I had no end in’t, else chance would have it so.

Another cry and shout within and cornetts





On the sinister side the heart lies—Palamon

Had the best-boding chance. This burst of clamour

Is sure the end o’th’ combat.

Enter Servant





SERVANT

They said that Palamon had Arcite’s body

Within an inch o‘th’ pyramid—that the cry

Was general ‘A Palamon’. But anon

Th’assistants made a brave redemption, and

The two bold titlers at this instant are

Hand to hand at it.

EMILIA

Were they metamorphosed

Both into one! O why? There were no woman

Worth so composed a man: their single share,

Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives

The prejudice of disparity, value’s shortness,

To any lady breathing—

Cornetts. Cry within, ‘Arcite, Arcite’





More exulting?

‘Palamon’ still?

SERVANT

Nay, now the sound is ‘Arcite’.

EMILIA

I prithee, lay attention to the cry.

Cornetts. A great shout and cry, ‘Arcite, victory!’





Set both thine ears to th’ business.

SERVANT

The cry is

‘Arcite’ and ‘Victory’—hark, ‘Arcite, victory!’

The combat’s consummation is proclaimed

By the wind instruments.

EMILIA

Half sights saw

That Arcite was no babe. God’s lid, his richness

And costliness of spirit looked through him—it could

No more be hid in him than fire in flax,

Than humble banks can go to law with waters

That drift winds force to raging. I did think

Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not

Why I did think so. Our reasons are not prophets

When oft our fancies are. They are coming off—

Alas, poor Palamon.

She puts away the pictures.

Cornetts. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous,

Arcite as victor, and attendants





THESEUS

Lo, where our sister is in expectation,

Yet quaking and unsettled. Fairest Emily,

The gods by their divine arbitrament

Have given you this knight. He is a good one

As ever struck at head. ⌈To Arcite and Emilia⌉ Give me

your hands.

(To Arcite) Receive you her, (to Emilia) you him: (to

both) be plighted with

A love that grows as you decay.

ARCITE

Emilia,

To buy you I have lost what’s dearest to me

Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheaply

As I do rate your value.

THESEUS (to Emilia)

O lovèd sister,

He speaks now of as brave a knight as e’er

Did spur a noble steed. Surely the gods

Would have him die a bachelor lest his race

Should show i’th’ world too godlike. His behaviour

So charmed me that, methought, Alcides was

To him a sow of lead. If I could praise

Each part of him to th‘all I have spoke, your Arcite

Did not lose by’t; for he that was thus good,

Encountered yet his better. I have heard

Two emulous Philomels beat the ear o’th’ night

With their contentious throats, now one the higher,

Anon the other, then again the first,

And by and by out-breasted, that the sense

Could not be judge between ’em—so it fared

Good space between these kinsmen, till heavens did

Make hardly one the winner. (To Arcite) Wear the

garland

With joy that you have won.—For the subdued,

Give them our present justice, since I know

Their lives but pinch ’em. Let it here be done.

The scene’s not for our seeing; go we hence

Right joyful, with some sorrow. (To Arcite) Arm your

prize;

I know you will not lose her. Hippolyta,

I see one eye of yours conceives a tear,

The which it will deliver.

Flourish





EMILIA

Is this winning?

O all you heavenly powers, where is your mercy?

But that your wills have said it must be so,

And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,

This miserable prince, that cuts away

A life more worthy from him than all women,

I should and would die too.

HFPPOLYTA

Infinite pity

That four such eyes should be so fixed on one

That two must needs be blind for’t.

THESEUS So it is.

Exeunt





5.6 Enter, guarded, Palamon and his three Knights pinioned; enter with them the Jailer and an executioner with block and axe



PALAMON

There’s many a man alive that hath outlived

The love o’th’ people; yea, i’th’ selfsame state

Stands many a father with his child: some comfort

We have by so considering. We expire,

And not without men’s pity; to live still,

Have their good wishes. We prevent

The loathsome misery of age, beguile

The gout and rheum that in lag hours attend

For grey approachers; we come towards the gods

Young and unwappered, not halting under crimes

Many and state—that sure shall please the gods

Sooner than such, to give us nectar with ’em,

For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,

Whose lives for this poor comfort are laid down,

You have sold ’em too too cheap.

FIRST KNIGHT

What ending could be

Of more content? O’er us the victors have

Fortune, whose title is as momentary

As to us death is certain—a grain of honour

They not o’erweigh us.

SECOND KNIGHT

Let us bid farewell, And with our patience anger tott’ring fortune,

Who at her certain’st reels.

THIRD KNIGHT Come, who begins?

PALAMON

E’en he that led you to this banquet shall

Taste to you all. (To the jailer) Aha, my friend, my

friend,

Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;

You’ll see’t done now for ever. Pray, how does she?

I heard she was not well; her kind of ill

Gave me some sorrow.

JAILER

Sir, she’s well restored

And to be married shortly.

PALAMON

By my short life,

I am most glad on’t. ’Tis the latest thing

I shall be glad of. Prithee, tell her so;

Commend me to her, and to piece her portion

Tender her this.

He gives his purse





FIRST KNIGHT

Nay, let’s be offerers all.

SECOND KNIGHT

Is it a maid?

PALAMON

Verily, I think so—

A right good creature more to me deserving

Than I can quit or speak of.

ALL THREE KNIGHTS Commend us to her.

They give their purses





JAILER

The gods requite you all, and make her thankful.

PALAMON

Adieu, and let my life be now as short

As my leave-taking.

He lies on the block





FIRST KNIGHT

Lead, courageous cousin.

SECOND and THIRD KNIGHTS We’ll follow cheerfully.

A great noise within: crying, ‘Run! Save! Hold!’

Enter in haste a Messenger





MESSENGER Hold! Hold! O, hold! Hold! Hold!

Enter Pirithous in haste





PIRITHOUS

Hold, ho! It is a cursèd haste you made

If you have done so quickly! Noble Palamon,

The gods will show their glory in a life

That thou art yet to lead.

PALAMON

Can that be,

When Venus, I have said, is false? How do things

fare?

PIRITHOUS

Arise, great sir, and give the tidings ear

That are most rarely sweet and bitter.

PALAMON

What

Hath waked us from our dream?

PIRITHOUS

List, then: your cousin,

Mounted upon a steed that Emily

Did first bestow on him, a black one owing

Not a hair-worth of white—which some will say

Weakens his price and many will not buy

His goodness with this note; which superstition

Here finds allowance—on this horse is Arcite

Trotting the stones of Athens, which the calkins

Did rather tell than trample; for the horse

Would make his length a mile, if’t pleased his rider

To put pride in him. As he thus went counting

The flinty pavement, dancing, as ‘twere, to th’ music

His own hooves made—for, as they say, from iron

Came music’s origin—what envious flint,

Cold as old Saturn and like him possessed

With fire malevolent, darted a spark,

Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made,

I comment not—the hot horse, hot as fire,

Took toy at this and fell to what disorder

His power could give his will; bounds; comes on end;

Forgets school-doing, being therein trained

And of kind manège; pig-like he whines

At the sharp rowel, which he frets at rather

Than any jot obeys; seeks all foul means

Of boist’rous and rough jad’ry to disseat

His lord, that kept it bravely. When naught served,

When neither curb would crack, girth break, nor

diff’ring plunges

Disroot his rider whence he grew, but that

He kept him ‘tween his legs, on his hind hooves—

On end he stands—

That Arcite’s legs, being higher than his head,

Seemed with strange art to hang. His victor’s wreath

Even then fell off his head; and presently

Backward the jade comes o’er and his full poise

Becomes the rider’s load. Yet is he living;

But such a vessel ’tis that floats but for

The surge that next approaches. He much desires

To have some speech with you—lo, he appears.

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, and Arcite in a chair borne by attendants





PALAMON

O miserable end of our alliance!

The gods are mighty. Arcite, if thy heart,

Thy worthy manly heart, be yet unbroken,

Give me thy last words. I am Palamon,

One that yet loves thee dying.

ARCITE

Take Emilia,

And with her all the world’s joy. Reach thy hand—

Farewell—I have told my last hour. I was false,

Yet never treacherous. Forgive me, cousin—

One kiss from fair Emilia—(they kiss) ’tis done.

Take her; I die.

He dies

PALAMON

Thy brave soul seek Elysium.

EMILIA (to Arcite’s body)

I’ll close thine eyes, Prince. Blessed souls be with thee.

Thou art a right good man, and, while I live,

This day I give to tears.

PALAMON

And I to honour.

THESEUS

In this place first you fought, e’en very here

I sundered you. Acknowledge to the gods

Our thanks that you are living.

His part is played, and, though it were too short,

He did it well. Your day is lengthened and

The blissful dew of heaven does arrouse you.

The powerful Venus well hath graced her altar,

And given you your love; our master, Mars,

Hath vouched his oracle, and to Arcite gave

The grace of the contention. So the deities

Have showed due justice.—Bear this hence.

⌈Exeunt attendants with Arcite’s body⌉

PALAMON cousin,

That we should things desire which do cost us

The loss of our desire! That naught could buy

Dear love, but loss of dear love!

THESEUS

Never fortune

Did play a subtler game—the conquered triumphs,

The victor has the loss. Yet in the passage

The gods have been most equal. Palamon,

Your kinsman hath confessed the right o’th’ lady

Did lie in you, for you first saw her and

Even then proclaimed your fancy. He restored her

As your stol’n jewel, and desired your spirit

To send him hence forgiven. The gods my justice

Take from my hand, and they themselves become

The executioners. Lead your lady off,

And call your lovers from the stage of death,

Whom I adopt my friends. A day or two

Let us look sadly and give grace unto

The funeral of Arcite, in whose end

The visages of bridegrooms we’ll put on

And smile with Palamon, for whom an hour,

But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry

As glad of Arcite, and am now as glad

As for him sorry. O you heavenly charmers,

What things you make of us! For what we lack

We laugh, for what we have, are sorry; still

Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful

For that which is, and with you leave dispute

That are above our question. Let’s go off

And bear us like the time.

Flourish. Exeunt



Epilogue

Enter Epilogue

EPILOGUE

I would now ask ye how ye like the play,

But, as it is with schoolboys, cannot say.

I am cruel fearful. Pray yet stay awhile,

And let me look upon ye. No man smile?

Then it goes hard, I see. He that has

Loved a young handsome wench, then, show his

face—

’Tis strange if none be here—and, if he will,

Against his conscience let him hiss and kill

Our market. ’Tis in vain, I see, to stay ye.

Have at the worst can come, then! Now, what say ye?

And yet mistake me not—I am not bold—

We have no such cause. If the tale we have totd—

For ’tis no other—any way content ye,

For to that honest purpose it was meant ye,

We have our end; and ye shall have ere long,

I dare say, many a better to prolong

Your old loves to us. We and all our might

Rest at your service. Gentlemen, good night.

Flourish. Exit





FURTHER READING



by SUSAN BROCK

WORKS on individual plays are listed in that section regardless of subject. UK publication details are supplied where available.





Editions of Shakespeare





Single volumes



Shakespeare’s Plays in Quarto: A Facsimile Edition of Copies Primarily from the Henry E. Huntington Library, eds. Michael J. B. Allen and Kenneth Muir (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1981)

A one-volume collection of early quartos.



The First Folio of Shakespeare: The Norton Facsimile, ed. Charlton Hinman, with a new introduction by Peter W. M. Blayney, 2nd edn. (New York and London: W. W. Norton, I996)

A facsimile of the First Folio, with a valuable introduction.



The Norton Shakespeare, gen. ed. Stephen Greenblatt, eds. Walter Cohen, Jean E. Howard, Katharine Eisaman Maus, with an essay on the Shakespearean stage by Andrew Gurr (New York: W. W. Norton, 1997)

Based on the Oxford edition with a general introduction and separate introductions to each play. Commentary and glossarial notes on the page.



The Complete Works of Shakespeare, ed. David Bevington, updated th edn. (New York: Longman, 1997) Uses work from the Bantam Shakespeare series (1988).



The Riverside Shakespeare, ed. G. Blakemore Evans with the assistance of J. M. M. Tobin, 2nd edn. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997)

A mixture of original and modern spelling with through-line numbering. Text used in the Harvard Concordance.



The Complete Pelican Shakespeare, gen. eds. Stephen 0rgel and A. L. Braunmuller (New York: Penguin, 2002).

Newly edited texts in modern American spelling, together with introductions and commentary.





Multi-volume series



New Variorum Shakespeare, ed. H. H. Furness (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1871―); rev. series (New York: MLA, 1977―)

Revised editions are Measure for Measure, Antony and Cleopatra, and As You Like It. Provides historical readings from a wide range of editions and critics.



Shakespeare Quarto Facsimiles, 16 vols (London: Shakespeare Association, Sidgwick & Jackson, 1939―52; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1957―75)

Includes only a selection of the quartos judged to be the most important.



The New Penguin Shakespeare, gen. ed. T. J. B. Spencer, associate ed. Stanley Wells (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1964―2001)

To be reissued from 2005 with new introductions and other editorial material.



The Oxford Shakespeare, gen. ed. Stanley Wells (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982―)

Texts independent of the one-volume Oxford edition. Also published in paperback in the World’s Classics series.



The New Cambridge Shakespeare, founding ed. Philip Brockbank, gen. ed. Brian Gibbons (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984―)

Not yet complete but early volumes being updated.



The Arden Shakespeare, 3rd series, gen. eds. Richard Proudfoot, Ann Thompson and David Scott Kastan (London: Arden Shakespeare, 1995―) Gradually replacing the Arden 2nd series (1951―82).



Shakespeare Folios (London: Nick Hern Books, 2001―) Parallel First Folio and modern texts.





General Reference



Berger, Thomas, L., William C. Bradford and Sidney L. Sondergard (eds.), An Index of Characters in Early Modern English Drama: Printed Plays, 1500―166o, rev. edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)



Dobson, Michael, and Stanley Wells (eds.), The Oxford Companion to Shakespeare (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001)



Harner, James L. (ed.), World Shakespeare Bibliography Online 1966―2004 (Johns Hopkins University Press in Association with the Folger Shakespeare Library, 2004) (〈http://www.worldshakesbib.org) by subscription)

Kastan, David Scott (ed.), A Companion to Shakespeare (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999)



Munro, John (ed.), The Shakspere Allusion Book: A Collection of Allusions to Shakspere from 1591―1700, originally compiled by C. M. Ingleby, Miss L. Toulmin Smith and Dr F. J. Furnivall, with a preface by Sir Edmund Chambers, 2 vols (London: Oxford University Press, 1932)



Wells, Stanley, and Lena Cowen Orlin (eds.), Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003)



Spevack, Marvin, The Harvard Concordance to Shakespeare (Cambridge MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1973)



Wells, Stanley, with James Shaw, A Dictionary of Shakespeare (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998)





Periodicals



Only the last or current publisher is listed.



Shakespeare, I―, 1996― (Washington DC: Georgetown University Press)



Shakespeare Bulletin (since 1992 incorporating Shakespeare on Film Newsletter), I―, 1983― (Carrollton GA: State University of West Georgia)



Shakespeare Newsletter, I―, 1951― (New Rochelle NY: Iona College, Dept. of English)



Shakespeare on Film Newsletter, 1―16, 1976―92 (Burlington VT: University of Vermont, Dept. of English)



Shakespeare Quarterly, I―, 1951― (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins Press for the Folger Shakespeare Library in association with the George Washington University)



Shakespeare Studies, I―, 1965― (London: Associated University Presses)



Shakespeare Survey, I―, 1948― (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)





Life



Chambers, E. K., William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems, 2 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930)



Duncan-Jones, Katherine, Ungentle Shakespeare: Scenes from His Life (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2001)



Dutton, Richard, William Shakespeare: A Literary Life (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1989)



Eccles, Mark, Shakespeare in Warwickshire (Madison WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1961)



Fraser, Russell, Young Shakespeare (New York: Columbia University Press, 1988)



—Shakespeare: The Later Years (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992)



Fripp, Edgar I., Shakespeare, Man and Artist, 2 vols (London: Oxford University Press, 1938)



Greenblatt, Stephen, Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare (London: Jonathan Cape, 2004)

Honan, Park, Shakespeare, a Life (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998)



Honigmann, E. A. J., The Lost Years, 2nd edn. (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1998)



Schoenbaum, S., William Shakespeare: A Compact Documentary Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977)



—William Shakespeare: A Documentary Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press in association with The Scolar Press, 1975)



—William Shakespeare: Records and Images (London: Scolar Press, 1981)



—Shakespeare’s Lives, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991)



Wells, Stanley, Shakespeare: A Dramatic Life (London: Sinclair-Stevenson, 1994)





Authorship



Gibson, H. N., The Shakespeare Claimants: A Critical Survey of the Four Principal Theories Concerning the Authorship of Shakespearean Plays (London: Methuen, 1962)



Hope, Jonathan, The Authorship of Shakespeare’s Plays: A Sociolinguistic Study (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994)



Matus, Irvin Leigh, Shakespeare, in Fact (New York: Continuum, 1994)



Michell, John, Who Wrote Shakespeare (London: Thames and Hudson, 1996)



Vickers, Brian, Shakespeare, Co-author: A Historical Study of Five Collaborative Plays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002)





Language



Abbott, E. A., A Shakespearian Grammar: An Attempt to Illustrate Some of the Differences between Elizabethan and Modern English, 3rd edn. ([London]: Macmillan, 1870; repr. New York: Dover, 1966)



Adamson, Sylvia, and others (eds.), Reading Shakespeare’s Dramatic Language: A Guide (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2001)



Blake, N. F., Shakespeare’s Language: An Introduction (London: Macmillan, 1983)



Brook, G. L., The Language of Shakespeare (London: Deutsch, 1976)



Cercignani, Fausto, Shakespeare’s Works and Elizabethan Pronunciation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981)



Clemen, Wolfgang, The Development of Shakespeare’s Imagery, 2nd edn. (London: Methuen, 1977)



Crystal, David, and Ben Crystal, Shakespeare’s Words: A Glossary and Language Companion (London: Penguin, 2002)

Dent, R. W., Shakespeare’s Proverbial Language: An Index (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1981)



Donawerth, Jane, Shakespeare and the Sixteenth-Century Study of Language (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1984)



Doran, Madeleine, Shakespeare’s Dramatic Language: Essays (Madison WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1976)



Hulme, Hilda M., Explorations in Shakespeare’s Language: Some Problems of Lexical Meaning in the Dramatic Text (London: Longman, 1962)



Hussey, S. S., The Literary Language of Shakespeare, 2nd edn. (London: Longman, 1992)



Joseph, Sister Miriam, Shakespeare’s Use of the Arts of Language (New York: Columbia University Press, 1947)



Kermode, Frank, Shakespeare’s Language (London: Allen Lane, 2000)



Kökeritz, Helge, Shakespeare’s Pronunciation (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1953)



—Shakespeare’s Names: A Pronouncing Dictionary (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1959; repr. 1985)



McDonald, Russ, Shakespeare and the Arts of Language (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001)



Magnusson, Lynne, Shakespeare and Social Dialogue: Dramatic Language and Elizabethan Letters (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999)



Mahood, M. M., Shakespeare’s Wordplay (London: Methuen, 1957)



Onions, C. T., A Shakespeare Glossary, enlarged and revised throughout by Robert D. Eagleson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986)



Parker, Patricia, Shakespeare from the Margins: Language, Culture, Context (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, I996)



Partridge, Eric, Shakespeare’s Bawdy: A Literary and Pyschological Essay and a Comprehensive Glossary, 3rd edn. (London : Routledge, 1991)



Quirk, Randolph, ‘Shakespeare and the English Language’, in his The Linguist and the English Language (London: Edward Arnold, 1974)



Salmon, Vivian, and Edwina Burness (eds.), A Reader in the Language of Shakespearean Drama (Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1987)



Schmidt, Alexander, Shakespeare Lexicon, 3rd edn., rev. and enlarged by Gregor Sarrazin, 2 vols (Berlin: Reimer, 1902; repr. New York: Dover, 1971)



Sipe, Dorothy L., Shakespeare’s Metrics (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1968)

Spurgeon, Caroline F. E., Shakespeare’s Imagery and What It Tells Us (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993) (First published 1935)



Trousdale, Marion, Shakespeare and the Rhetoricians (London: Scolar Press, 1982)



Vickers, Brian, The Artistry of Shakespeare’s Prose (London: Methuen, 1968)



Williams, Gordon, A Glossary of Shakespeare’s Sexual Language (London: Athlone, 1997)



Wright, George T., Shakespeare’s Metrical Art (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1988)



—Hearing the Measures: Shakespearean and Other Inflections (Madison WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002)





Sources



Baldwin, T. W., William Shakspere’s Petty School (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1943)



—William Shakspere’s Small Latine and Lesse Greeke, 2 vols (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1944)



Bate, Jonathan, Shakespeare and Ovid (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993)



Bullough, Geoffrey (ed.), Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, 8 vols (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1957―73)



Donaldson, E. Talbot, The Swan at the Well: Shakespeare Reading Chaucer (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1985)



Gillespie, Stuart, Shakespeare’s Books: A Dictionary of Shakespeare Sources (London: Athlone, 2001)



Hart, Alfred, Shakespeare and the Homilies and Other Pieces of Research into the Elizabethan Drama (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1934; repr. New York: Octagon Books, 1977)



Lennox, Charlotte, Shakespear Illustrated: Or, The Novels and Histories, on which the Plays of Shakespear Are Founded, 3 vols (London: Miller, 1753―4; repr. New York: AMS Press, 1973)



Lynch, Stephen J., Shakespearean Intertextuality: Studies in Selected Sources and Plays (Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1998)



Milward, Peter, Shakespeare’s Religious Background (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1973)



Miola, Robert S., Shakespeare and Classical Tragedy: The Influence of Seneca (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992)



—Shakespeare and Classical Comedy: The Influence of Plautus and Terence (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994)

—Shakespeare’s Reading (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)



Muir, Kenneth, The Sources of Shakespeare’s Plays (London: Methuen, 1977)



Noble, Richmond, Shakespeare’s Biblical Knowledge and Use of ‘The Book of Common Prayer’ as Exemplified in the Plays of the First Folio (London: SPCK, 1935; repr. New York: Gordon Press Publishers, 1972)



Patterson, Annabel, Reading Holinshed’s Chronicles (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 1994)



Roe, John, Shakespeare and Machiavelli (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 2002)



Salingar, Leo, Shakespeare and the Traditions of Comedy (London: Cambridge University Press, 1974)



Scragg, Leah, Shakespeare’s Mouldy Tales (London: Longman, 1992)



—Shakespeare’s Alternative Tales (London: Longman, 1996)



Shaheen, Naseeb, Biblical References in Shakespeare’s Plays (London: Associated University Presses, 1999)



Spencer, T. J. B., Shakespeare’s Plutarch (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1964)



Thompson, Ann, Shakespeare’s Chaucer: A Study in Literary Origins (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1978)



Thompson, J. A. K., Shakespeare and the Classics (London: Allen & Unwin, 1952)



Whitaker, Virgil K., Shakespeare’s Use of Learning: An Inquiry into the Growth of his Mind and Art (San Marino CA: Huntington Library, 1953)





Text



Blayney, Peter W. M., The First Folio of Shakespeare (Washington DC: Folger Library Publications, 1991)



—‘The Publication of Playbooks’, in John D. Cox and David Scott Kastan (eds.), A New History of Early English Drama (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997)



De Grazia, Margreta, Shakespeare Verbatim: The Reproduction of Authenticity and the 1790 Apparatus (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991)



—and Peter Stallybrass, ‘The Materiality of the Shakespearean Text’, Shakespeare Quarterly, 44 (1993), 255―83



Erne, Lukas, Shakespeare as Literary Dramatist (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003)



Greg, W. W., The Editorial Problem in Shakespeare: A Survey of the Foundations of the Text, 3rd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954)



—The Shakespeare First Folio: Its Bibliographical and Textual History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1955)



Hinman, Charlton, The Printing and Proof-Reading of the First Folio of Shakespeare, 2 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963)



Honigmann, E. A. J., The Stability of Shakespeare’s Text (London: Edward Arnold, 1965)



loppolo, Grace, Revising Shakespeare (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1991)



Irace, Kathleen O., Reforming the ‘Bad’ Quartos: Performance and Provenance of Six Shakespearean First Editions (London: Associated University Presses, 1994)



Jarvis, Simon, Scholars and Gentlemen: Shakespearian and Textual Criticism and Representations of Scholarly Labour, 1725―1765 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995)



Maguire, Laurie, Shakespearean Suspect Texts: The ‘Bad’ Quartos and Their Contexts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)



Murphy, Andrew, Shakespeare in Print: A History and Chronology of Shakespeare Publishing (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003)



Orgel, Stephen, The Authentic Shakespeare and Other Problems of the Early Modern Stage (London: Routledge, 2002)



Pollard, A. W., Shakespeare’s Fight with the Pirates and the Problems of the Transmission of His Text, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967)



Seary, Peter, Lewis Theobald and the Editing of Shakespeare (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990)



Simpson, Percy, Shakespearian Punctuation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1911)



Taylor, Gary, ‘Revising Shakespeare’, Text, 3 (1987), 285―304



—and John Jowett, Shakespeare Reshaped 1606―1623 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993)



Walker, Alice, Textual Problems of the First Folio: ‘Richard III’, ‘King Lear’, ‘Troilus and Cressida’, ‘2 Henry IV’, ‘Hamlet’, ‘Othello’ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953)



—Edward Capell and His Editions of Shakespeare, British Academy Shakespeare Lecture (London: British Academy, 1962)



Wells, Stanley, ‘Modernizing Shakespeare’s Spelling’, in Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor (eds.), Modernizing Shakespeare’s Spelling, with Three Studies in the Text of ‘Henry V’ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979)



—and Gary Taylor, with John Jowett and William Montgomery, William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987)



Werstine, Paul, ‘Narratives about Printed Shakespeare Texts: “Foul Papers” and “Bad” Quartos’, Shakespeare Quarterly, 41 (1990), 65-86



—‘Shakespeare’, in D. C. Greetham (ed.), Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research (New York: MLA, 1995)



West, Anthony James, The Shakespeare First Folio: The History of the Book, Vols I- (Oxford: Oxford University Press, z oo r-)



Wilson, F. P., Shakespeare and the New Bibliography, rev. and ed. Helen Gardner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970)





Performance



Bate, Jonathan, and Russell Jackson (eds.), Shakespeare: An Illustrated Stage History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, I996)



Bevington, David M., Action is Eloquence: Shakespeare’s Language of Gesture (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1984)



Bulman, James C., Shakespeare, Theory and Performance (London: Routledge, 1996)



Hill, Errol, Shakespeare in Sable: A History of Black Shakespearean Actors (Amherst MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1984)



Hodgdon, Barbara, The Shakespeare Trade: Performances and Appropriations (Philadelphia PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998)



Howard, Jean E., Shakespeare’s Art of Orchestration: Stage Technique and Audience Response (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1984)



Joseph, Bertram, Acting Shakespeare, 2nd rev. edn. (New York: Theatre Arts Books, 1969)



Salgado, Gamini, Eyewitnesses of Shakespeare: First-Hand Accounts of Performances 1590-1890 (London: University of Sussex Press for Chatto & Windus, 1975)



Shattuck, Charles H., The Shakespeare Promptbooks: A Descriptive Catalogue (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1965)



Shaughnessy, Robert (ed.), Shakespeare in Performance, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000)



Speaight, Robert, Shakespeare on the Stage: An Illustrated History of Shakespearian Performance (London: Collins, 1973)



Sprague, A. C., The Doubling of Parts in Shakespeare’s Plays (London: Society for Theatre Research, 1966)



Stern, Tiffany, Making Shakespeare from Stage to Page (London: Routledge, 2004)



Styan, J. L., Shakespeare’s Stagecraft (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967)

Wells, Stanley (ed.), Shakespeare in the Theatre: An Anthology of Criticism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997)



—and Sarah Stanton (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Stage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002)



Williams, Simon, Shakespeare on the German Stage, Vol. I: 1586-1914 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990)





Shakespeare’s playhouse



Baldwin, T. W., The Organisation and Personnel of the Company (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1927; repr. New York: Russell and Russell, 1961)



Barroll, J. Leeds, Politics, Plague and Shakespeare’s Theater: The Stuart Years (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, rpp r)



Beckerman, Bernard, Shakespeare at the Globe, 1599-1609 (New York: Macmillan, 1962)



Bentley, G. E., The Jacobean and Caroline Stage, 7 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1941-68)



—The Profession of Dramatist in Shakespeare’s Time, 1590-1642 (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971)



—The Profession of Player in Shakespeare’s Time, 1590-1642 (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984)



Berry, Herbert, Shakespeare’s Playhouses (New York: AMS, 1987)



Chambers, E. K., The Elizabethan Stage, 4 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1923)



Cook, Ann Jennalie, The Privileged Playgoers of Shakespeare’s London, 1576-1642 (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981)



Dessen, Alan C., Recovering Shakespeare’s Theatrical Vocabulary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995)



—and Leslie Thomson, A Dictionary of Stage Directions in English Drama, 1580-1642 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999)



Gurr, Andrew, The Shakespearean Stage 1574-1642, 3rd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992)



—Playgoing in Shakespeare’s London, 3rd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)



—The Shakespearian Playing Companies (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996)



—The Shakespeare Company 1594-1642 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)



—with John Orrell, Rebuilding Shakespeare’s Globe (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1989)

Hodges, C. Walter, Shakespeare’s Second Globe, the Missing Monument (London: Oxford University Press, 1973)



King, T. J., Shakespearian Staging, 1599-1642 (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1971)



—Casting Shakespeare’s Plays: London Actors and Their Roles 1590-1642 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992)



Knutson, Roslyn Lander, The Repertory of Shakespeare’s Company 1594-1613 (Fayetteville AR: University of Arkansas Press, 1991)



Linthicum, M. Channing, Costume in the Drama of Shakespeare and His Contemporaries (Oxford: Clarendon Press, I936)



Montrose, Louis Adrian, The Purpose of Playing: Shakespeare and the Cultural Politics of the Elizabethan Theatre (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 1996)



Mulryne, J. R., and Margaret Shewring (eds.), Shakespeare’s Globe Rebuilt (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997)



Nungezer, Edwin, A Dictionary of Actors and Other Persons Associated with the Public Presentation of Plays in England before 1642 (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1929)



Orrell, John, The Quest for Shakespeare’s Globe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983)



Thomson, Peter, Shakespeare’s Professional Career (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992)



—Shakespeare’s Theatre, 2nd edn. (London: Routledge, 1992)



Wiles, David, Shakespeare’s Clown: Actor and Text in the Elizabethan Playhouse (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987)





1700-1900



Foulkes, Richard (ed.), Shakespeare and the Victorian Stage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986)



Hogan, Charles Beecher, Shakespeare in the Theatre, 1701- 1800, 2 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952-7)



Hughes, Alan, Henry Irving, Shakespearean (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981)



Odell, George C. D., Shakespeare from Betterton to Irving, 2 vols (New York: Scribner, 1920)



Shattuck, Charles H., Shakespeare on the American Stage [Vol. I]: From the Hallams to Edwin Booth (Washington DC: Folger Shakespeare Library, 1976)



—Shakespeare on the American Stage, Vol. 2: From Booth and Barrett to Sothern and Marlowe (London: Associated University Presses, 1987)



Sprague, A. C., Shakespeare and the Actors: The Stage Business in his Plays, 1660-1905 (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1945; repr. New York: Russell and Russell, 1963)





From 1900



Barton, John, Playing Shakespeare (London: Methuen, 1984)



Berry, Ralph, On Directing Shakespeare: Interviews with Contemporary Directors (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1989)



Brockbank, J. P., Russell Jackson, R. L. Smallwood (eds.), Players of Shakespeare (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985-)



Brown, John Russell, Shakespeare’s Plays in Performance (London: Edward Arnold, 1966)



—Free Shakespeare (London: Heinemann International, 1974)



—New Sites for Shakespeare: Theatre, the Audience and Asia (London: Routledge, 1999)



Coursen, H. R., Shakespearean Performance as Interpretation (London: Associated University Presses, 1992)



David, Richard, Shakespeare in the Theatre (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978)



Holland, Peter, English Shakespeares: Shakespeare on the English Stage in the 1990s (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997)



Hortmann, Wilhelm, Shakespeare on the German Stage: The Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)



Kennedy, Dennis, Looking at Shakespeare: A Visual History of Twentieth-Century Performance, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001)



—(ed.), Foreign Shakespeare: Contemporary Performance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993)



Kerr, Heather, Robin Eaden and Madge Mitton (eds.), Shakespeare: World Views (London: Associated University Presses, 1996)



Li, Ruru, Shashibiya: Staging Shakespeare in China (London: Eurospan, 2003)



Mazer, Cary M., Shakespeare Refashioned: Elizabethan Plays on Edwardian Stages (Ann Arbor MI: UMI Research Press, 1981)



Minami, Ryuta, Ian Carruthers and John Gillies (eds.), Performing Shakespeare in Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001)



Quince, Rohan, Shakespeare in South Africa: Stage Productions During the Apartheid Era (New York: Peter Lang, 2000)



Rutter, Carol, Clamorous Voices: Shakespeare’s Women Today, ed. Faith Evans (London: The Women’s Press, 1988)



Sasayama, Takashi, J. R. Mulryne and Margaret Shewring (eds.), Shakespeare and the Japanese Stage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)



Sprague, Arthur Colby, and J. C. Trewin, Shakespeare’s Plays Today: Some Customs and Conventions of the Stage (London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1970)



Styan, J. L., The Shakespeare Revolution: Criticism and Performance in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977)



Trewin, J. C., Shakespeare on the English Stage 1900-1964 (London: Barrie and Rockliff, 1964)



Worthen, W. B., Shakespeare and the Authority of Performance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997)





TV and Film



Ball, Robert Hamilton, Shakespeare on Silent Film: A Strange Eventful History (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1968)



Boose, Lynda E., and Richard Burt (eds.), Shakespeare the Movie: Popularizing the Plays on Film, TV and Video (London: Routledge, 1997)



—Shakespeare the Movie II: Popularizing the Plays on Film, TV, Video and DVD (London: Routledge, 2003)



Buchman, Lorne M., Still in Movement: Shakespeare on Screen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991)



Bulman, J. C., and H. R. Coursen (eds.), Shakespeare on Television: An Anthology of Essays and Reviews (London: University Press of New England, 1988)



Burnett, Mark Thornton, and Ramona Wray (eds.), Shakespeare, Film, Fin de Siècle (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000)



Burt, Richard, Unspeakable Shaxxxspeares: Queer Theory and American Kiddie Culture (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1998)



Collick, John, Shakespeare, Cinema and Society (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1989)



Coursen, H. R., Shakespeare in Production: Whose History? (Athens OH: University of Ohio Press, 1996)



Crowl, Samuel, Shakespeare Observed: Studies in Performance on Stage and Screen (Athens OH: University of Ohio Press, 1992)



Davies, Anthony, Filming Shakespeare’s Plays: The Adaptations of Laurence Olivier, Orson Welles, Peter Brook and (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988)



—and Stanley Wells (eds.), Shakespeare and the Moving Image: The Plays on Film and Television (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994)



Donaldson, Peter S., Shakespearean Films/Shakespearean Directors (Boston MA: Unwin Hyman, 1990)



Jackson, Russell (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Film (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000)



Jorgens, Jack J., Shakespeare on Film (Bloomington IN: Indiana University Press, 1977)



McKernan, Luke, and Olwen Terris (eds.), Walking Shadows: Shakespeare in the National Film and Television Archive (London: British Film Institute, 1994)



Manvell, Roger, Shakespeare and the Film (London: Dent, 1971)



Pilkington, Ace G., Screening Shakespeare: From ‘Richard II’ to ‘Henry V’ (London: Associated University Presses, 1991)



Rosenthal, Daniel, Shakespeare on Screen (London: Hamlyn, 2000)



Rothwell, Kenneth S., A History of Shakespeare on Screen: A Century of Film and Television, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)



—and Annabelle Henkin Melzer (eds.), Shakespeare on Screen: An International Filmography and Videography (London: Mansell, 1990)



Shaughnessy, Robert (ed.), Shakespeare on Film, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1998)





Criticism





History of Criticism



Bate, Jonathan, Shakespeare and the English Romantic Imagination (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986)



—(ed.). The Romantics on Shakespeare (London: Penguin, 1992)



Bristol, Michael, Shakespeare’s America/America’s Shakespeare (London: Routledge, 1990)



Dunn, Esther Cloudman, Shakespeare in America (New York: Macmillan, 1939)



Eastman, Arthur M., A Short History of Shakespearean Criticism (New York: Random House, 1968)



Foakes, R.A., Hamlet versus Lear: Cultural Politics and Shakespeare’s Art (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993)



Grady, Hugh, The Modernist Shakespeare: Critical Texts in a Material World (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991)



Haines, C. M., Shakespeare in France: Criticism, Voltaire to Victor Hugo (London: for the Shakespeare Association by H. Milford, Oxford University Press, 1925)



Halpern, Richard, Shakespeare Among the Moderns (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 1997)



Hattaway, Michael, Boika Sokolova and Derek Roper (eds.), Shakespeare in the New Europe (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1994)



Kolin, Philip C. (ed.), Shakespeare and Feminist Criticism: An Annotated Bibliography and Commentary (New York: Garland, 1991)



LeWinter, Oswald (ed.), Shakespeare in Europe (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970)



Pascal, R. (ed.), Shakespeare in Germany: 1740-1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1937)



Pechter, Edward, What Was Shakespeare? Renaissance Plays and Changing Critical Practice (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 1995)



Stavisky, A. Y., Shakespeare and the Victorians: Roots of Modern Criticism (Norman OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1969)



Stříbrný, Zděnek, Shakespeare and Eastern Europe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)



Taylor, Michael, Shakespeare Criticism in the Twentieth Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001)



Thompson, Ann, and Sasha Roberts (eds.), Women Reading Shakespeare, 1660-1900; An Anthology of Criticism (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997)



Vickers, Brian, Appropriating Shakespeare: Contemporary Critical Quarrels (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1993)



—(ed.), Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage, 6 vols (London: Routledge, 1974-81)



Zhang, Xiao Yang, Shakespeare in China: A Comparative Study of Two Traditions and Cultures (London: Associated University Presses, 1996)





General



Alexander, Catherine M. S., and Stanley Wells (eds.), Shakespeare and Race (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000)



—Shakespeare and Sexuality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001)



Atkins, G. Douglas, and David M. Bergeron, Shakespeare and Deconstruction (New York: Peter Lang, 1988)



Berger, Harry, Imaginary Audition: Shakespeare on Stage and Page (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1989)



—Making Trifles of Terrors: Redistributing Complicities in Shakespeare, ed. Peter Erickson (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1997)



Bristol, Michael D., Big-time Shakespeare (London: Routledge, 1996)



Cavell, Stanley, Disowning Knowledge in Six Plays of Shakespeare (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987)



Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, Coleridge’s Criticism of Shakespeare: A Selection, ed. R. A. Foakes (London: Athlone, 1989)



Danson, Lawrence, Shakespeare’s Dramatic Genres (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)



De Grazia, Margreta, and Stanley Wells (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001)



Desmet, Christy, Reading Shakespeare’s Characters: Rhetoric, Ethics, and Identity (Amherst MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992)



Dollimore, Jonathan, and Alan Sinfield (eds.), Political Shakespeare: Essays in Cultural Materialism, 2nd edn. (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994)



Drakakis, John (ed.), Alternative Shakespeares I (London: Methuen, 1985)



Eagleton, Terry, William Shakespeare (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986)



Evans, Malcolm, Signifying Nothing: Truth’s True Contents in Shakespeare’s Text, 2nd edn. (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1989)



Frye, Northrop, Northrop Frye on Shakespeare, ed. Robert Sandler (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1986)



Garber, Marjorie, Shakespeare’s Ghost Writers: Literature as Uncanny Causality (London: Methuen, 1987)



Gillies, John, Shakespeare and the Geography of Difference (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994)



Greenblatt, Stephen, Renaissance Self-fashioning: From More to Shakespeare (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 1980)



—Shakespearean Negotiations: The Circulation of Social Energy in Renaissance England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988)



Hawkes, Terence, That Shakespeherian Rag: Essays on a Critical Process (London: Methuen, 1986)



—(ed.), Alternative Shakespeares 2 (London: Routledge, 1996)



Hazlitt, William, Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays, with an introduction by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, World’s Classics (London: Oxford University Press, 1952) (First published 1817)



Howard, Jean E., and Marion F. O’Connor (eds.), Shakespeare Reproduced: The Text in History and Ideology (London: Methuen, 1987)



Howard, Jean E., and Scott Cutler Shershow (eds.), Marxist Shakespeares (New York and London: Routledge, 2001)



Jardine, Lisa, Reading Shakespeare Historically (London: Routledge, 1996)



Johnson, Samuel, Samuel Johnson on Shakespeare, ed. with an introduction and notes by Henry Woudhuysen (London: Penguin, 1989)



Jones, Emrys, Scenic Form in Shakespeare (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971)



Kastan, David Scott, Shakespeare and the Shapes of Time (London: Macmillan, 1982)



Kernan, Alvin B., The Playwright as Magician: Shakespeare’s Image of the Poet in the English Public Theater (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1979)



Knapp, Robert S., Shakespeare: The Theater and the Book (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989)



Knights, L. C., ‘How Many Children Had Lady Macbeth? An Essay in the Theory and Practice of Shakespeare Criticism’, in his Explorations: Essays in Criticism, Mainly on the Literature of the Seventeenth Century (London: Chatto and Windus, 1946)



Kott, Jan, Shakespeare Our Contemporary, trans. Boleslaw Taborski, 2ndedn. (London: Methuen, 1967)



Loomba, Ania, and Martin Orkin (eds.), Post-Colonial Shakespeares (London: Routledge, 1998)



Marcus, Leah, Puzzling Shakespeare: Local Reading and its Discontents (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1988)



Neely, Carol Thomas, Broken Nuptials in Shakespeare’s Plays (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1985)



Parker, Patricia, and Geoffrey Hartman (eds.), Shakespeare and the Question of Theory (London: Methuen, 1985)



Patterson, Annabel, Shakespeare and the Popular Voice (Oxford: Blackwell, 1989)



Rabkin, Norman, Shakespeare and the Problem of Meaning (Chicago IL: Chicago University Press, 1981)



Rossiter, A. P., Angel with Horns: Fifteen Lectures on Shakespeare, ed. Graham Storey; reissued with an introduction by Peter Holland (London: Longman, 1989)



Schwartz, Murray M., and Coppélia Kahn (eds.), Representing Shakespeare: New Psychoanalytic Essays (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980)



Shapiro, James, Shakespeare and the Jews (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996)



Shaw, George Bernard, Shaw on Shakespeare, ed. with an introduction by Edwin Wilson (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969)



Taylor, Gary, Moment by Moment by Shakespeare (London: Macmillan, 1985)



Weimann, Robert, Shakespeare and the Popular Tradition in the Theater: Studies in the Social Dimension of Dramatic Form and Function, trans. Robert Schwartz (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978)





Gender



Adelman, Janet, Suffocating Mothers: Fantasies of Maternal Origin in Shakespeare’s Plays, ‘Hamlet’ to ’The Tempest’ (London: Routledge, 1992)



Barker, Deborah, and Ivo Kamps (eds.), Shakespeare and Gender: A History (London: Verso, 1995)



Dusinberre, Juliet, Shakespeare and the Nature of Women, 2nd edn. (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1996)



Erickson, Peter, Patriarchal Structures in Shakespeare Drama (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1985)



Kahn, Coppélia, Man’s Estate: Masculine Identity in Shakespeare (Berkeley CA: University of California, 1981)



Lenz, Carolyn Ruth Swift, Gayle Greene and Carol Thomas Neely, The Woman’s Part: Feminist Criticism of Shakespeare (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1980)



Orgel, Stephen, Impersonations: The Performance of Gender in Shakespeare’s England (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)



Traub, Valerie, Desire and Anxiety: Circulations of Sexuality in Shakespearean Drama (London: Routledge, 1992)



Wayne, Valerie (ed.), The Matter of Difference: Materialist Feminist Criticism of Shakespeare (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991)





Comedy



Barber, C. L., Shakespeare’s Festive Comedy: A Study of Dramatic Form and its Relation to Social Custom (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959)



Carroll, William C., The Metamorphoses of Shakespearean Comedy (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985)



Evans, Bertrand, Shakespeare’s Comedies (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960)



Freedman, Barbara, Staging the Gaze: Postmodernism, Psychoanalysis and Shakespearean Comedy (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 1991)



Frye, Northrop, The Myth of Deliverance: Reflections on Shakespeare’s Problem Comedies, introduction by A.C. Hamilton (Toronto: Toronto University Press, 1993) (First published 1983)



Mowat, Barbara A., The Dramaturgy of Shakespeare’s Romances (Athens GA: University of Georgia Press, 1976)



Tillyard, E. M. W., Shakespeare’s Early Comedies (London: Chatto & Windus, 1965)



Wheeler, Richard P., Shakespeare’s Development and the Problem Comedies: Turn and Counterturn (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1981)





History



Charney, Maurice, Shakespeare’s Roman Plays: The Function of Imagery in the Drama (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1963)



Howard, Jean E., and Phyllis Rackin, Engendering a Nation: A Feminist Account of Shakespeare’s English Histories (London: Routledge, 1997)



Kahn, Coppélia, Roman Shakespeare: Warriors, Wounds and Women (London: Routledge, 1997)



Rackin, Phyllis, Stages of History: Shakespeare’s English Chronicles (London: Routledge, 1991)



Saccio, Peter, Shakespeare’s English Kings: History, Chronicle and Drama, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)



Siegel, Paul N., Shakespeare’s English and Roman History Plays: A Marxist Approach (London: Associated University Presses, 1986)



Tillyard, E. M. W., Shakespeare’s History Plays (London: Chatto and Windus, 1944)





Tragedy



Bradley, A. C., Shakespearean Tragedy: Lectures on ‘Hamlet’, ‘Othello’, ‘King Lear’, ‘Macbeth’, with a foreword by John Bayley (London: Penguin, 1991) (First published 1904)



Garner, Shirley Nelson, and Madelon Sprengnether (eds.), Shakespearean Tragedy and Gender (Bloomington IN: Indiana University Press, 1996)



Snyder, Susan, The Comic Matrix of Shakespeare’s Tragedies: ‘Romeo and Juliet’, ‘Hamlet’, ‘Othello’, and ‘King Lear’ (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979)



Whitaker, Virgil K., The Mirror Up to Nature: The Technique of Shakespeare’s Tragedies (San Marino CA: Huntington Library, 1965)





Poems and Sonnets



Akrigg, G. P. V., Shakespeare and the Earl of Southampton (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1968)



Booth, Stephen, An Essay on Shakespeare’s Sonnets (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1969)



Donaldson, Ian, The Rapes of Lucretia: A Myth and Its Transformations (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982)



Dubrow, Heather, Captive Victors: Shakespeare’s Narrative Poems and Sonnets (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 1987)



Edmondson, Paul, and Stanley Wells, Shakespeare’s Sonnets (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004)



Fineman, Joel, Shakespeare’s Perjured Eye: The Invention of Poetic Subjectivity in the Sonnets (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1986)



Jones, Peter (ed.), Shakespeare, ‘The Sonnets’, A Casebook (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1977)



Kerrigan, John (ed.), Motives of Woe: Shakespeare and ‘Female Complaint’, A Critical Anthology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991)



Knight, G. Wilson, The Mutual Flame: On Shakespeare’s ‘Sonnets’ and ‘The Phoenix and the Turtle’, G. Wilson Knight Collected Works, 5 (London: Routledge, 2002) (First published 1955)



Pequigney, Joseph, Such Is My Love: A Study of Shakespeare’s Sonnets (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 1985)



Smith, Hallett, The Tension of the Lyre: Poetry in Shakespeare’s Sonnets (San Marino CA: Huntington Library, 1981)



Vendler, Helen, The Art of Shakespeare’s Sonnets (Cambridge MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1997)





Individual Plays





The Early Comedies: The Comedy of Errors, Love’s Labour’s Lost, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, The Taming of the Shrew, The Two Gentlemen of Verona



Carroll, William C., The Great Feast of Language in ‘Love’s Labour’s Lost’ (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976)



Dolan, Frances E. (ed.), ‘The Taming of the Shrew’: Texts and Contexts (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1996)



Gilbert, Miriam, Love’s Labour’s Lost, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993)



Griffiths, Trevor R. (ed.), A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)



Halio, Jay L., A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994)



Haring-Smith, Tori, From Farce to Metadrama: A Stage History of ‘The Taming of the Shrew’ 1594-1983 (Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1985)



Holderness, Graham, The Taming of the Shrew, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1989)



Kennedy, Judith M., and Richard F. Kennedy (eds.), A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Shakespeare: the Critical Tradition (London: Athlone, 1999)



Miola, Robert S. (ed.), ‘The Comedy of Errors’: Critical Essays (New York: Garland, 1997)



Paster, Gail Kern (ed.), A Midsummer Night’s Dream: Texts and Contexts (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999)



Riehle, Wolfgang, Shakespeare, Plautus and the Humanist Tradition (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1990)



Schafer, Elizabeth (ed.), The Taming of the Shrew, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002)



Schlueter, June (ed.), ‘Two Gentlemen of Verona’: Critical Essays (New York: Garland, 1996)



Selbourne, David, The Making of ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’: An Eye-witness Account of Peter Brook’s Production from First Rehearsal to First Night, with an introductory essay by Simon Trussler (London: Methuen, 1982)



Warren, Roger, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1983)



Wiles, David, Shakespeare’s Almanac: ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’, Marriage and the Elizabethan Calendar (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1993)



Williams, Gary Jay, Our Moonlight Revels: ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’ in the Theatre (Iowa City IA: University of Iowa Press, 1997)



Yates, Frances A., A Study of ‘Love’s Labour’s Lost’ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1936)



Young, David P., Something of Great Constancy: The Art of ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’ (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1966)



The Middle Comedies: As You Like It, The Merchant of Venice, The Merry Wives of Windsor, Much Ado About Nothing, Twelfth Night



Billington, Michael (ed.), Directors’ Shakespeare: Approaches to ‘Twelfth Night’ by Bill Alexander, John Barton, John Caird, Terry Hands (London: Nick Hern, 1990)



Cerasano, S. P. (ed.), A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on William Shakespeare’s ‘The Merchant of Venice’ (London: Routledge, 2004)



Cox, John F. (ed.), Much Ado About Nothing, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997)



Danson, Lawrence, The Harmonies of ‘The Merchant of Venice’ (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1978)



Draper, John W., The ‘Twelfth Night’ of Shakespeare’s Audience (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1950)



Edelman, Charles (ed.), The Merchant of Venice, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002)



Gay, Penny, William Shakespeare, ‘As You Like It’, Writers and Their Work (Plymouth: Northcote House in Association with the British Council, 1999)



Gilbert, Miriam, The Merchant of Venice, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2002)



Gross, John J., Shylock: Four Hundred Years in the Life of a Legend (London: Chatto and Windus, 1992)



Hotson, Leslie, The First Night of ‘Twelfth Night’ (London: Hart Davis, 1954)



Marshall, Cynthia (ed.), As You Like It, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)



Mason, Pamela, Much Ado about Nothing, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1992)



Osbourne, Laurie E., The Trick of Singularity: ‘Twelfth Night’ and the Performance Editions (Iowa City IA: University of Iowa Press, 1996)



Overton, Bill, The Merchant of Venice, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1987)



Pennington, Michael, ‘Twelfth Night’: A User’s Guide (London: Nick Hern, 2000)



Potter, Lois, Twelfth Night, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1985)



Prouty, Charles T., The Sources of ‘Much Ado about Nothing’: A Critical Study together with the Text of Peter Beverley’s ‘Ariodante and Ieneura’ (New Haven CT: Yale University Press, 1950)



Roberts, Jeanne Addison, Shakespeare’s English Comedy: ‘The Merry Wives of Windsor’ in Context (Lincoln NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1979)



Smallwood, Robert, As You Like It, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2003)



Smith, Bruce R. (ed.), ‘Twelfth Night or, What You Will’: Texts and Contexts (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001)



Wells, Stanley, ‘Editorial Treatment of Foul-Paper Texts: Much Ado about Nothing as Test Case’, Review of English Studies, 31 (1980), 1-16



White, R. S. (ed.), Twelfth Night, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1996)



Wynne-Davies, Marion (ed.), ‘Much Ado about Nothing’ and ‘The Taming of the Shrew’, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001)



The Problem Plays: All’s Well That Ends Well, Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida



Adamson, Janet, Troilus and Cressida, Harvester New Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Brighton: Harvester, I987)



Bennett, Josephine Waters, ‘Measure for Measure’ as Royal Entertainment (New York: Columbia University Press, 1966)



Cole, Howard C., The ‘All’s Well’ Story from Boccaccio to Shakespeare (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1981)



Geckle, George L. (ed.), Measure for Measure, Shakespeare: the Critical Tradition (London: Athlone, 2001)



Gless, Darryl J., ‘Measure for Measure’: The Law and the Convent (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979)



Hawkins, Harriett, Measure for Measure, Harvester New Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Brighton: Harvester, 1987)



Jowett, John, ‘The Audacity of Measure for Measure in 1621’, Ben Jonson Journal, 8 (2001), 229-47



Kimbrough, Robert, Shakespeare’s ‘Troilus and Cressida’ and its Setting (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1964)



Nicholls, Graham, Measure for Measure, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1986)



Price, Joseph G., The Unfortunate Comedy: A Study of ‘All’s Well That Ends Well’ and Its Critics (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1968)



Rollins, Hyder E., The Troilus-Cressida Story from Chaucer to Shakespeare (New York: Haskell House, 1972) (Reprinted from PMLA, 32.3 (1917))



Shuger, Debora K., Political Theologies in Shakespeare’s England: The Sacred and the State in ‘Measure for Measure’ (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001)



Styan, J. L., All’s Well That Ends Well, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984)



Taylor, Gary, ‘Shakespeare’s Mediterranean Measure for Measure’, in Shakespeare and the Mediterranean, eds. Tom Clayton, Susan Brock, Vicente Fores (Newark DE: University of Delaware Press, 2004)



Zitner, Sheldon P., All’s Well That Ends Well, Harvester New Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1989)



The Late Plays: All is True (Henry VIII), Cymbeline, Pericles, The Tempest, The Two Noble Kinsmen, The Winter’s Tale



Bartholomeusz, Dennis, ‘The Winter’s Tale’ in Performance in England and America, 1611-1976 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982)



Bertram, Paul, Shakespeare and ‘The Two Noble Kinsmen’ (New Brunswick NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1965)



Draper, R. P., The Winter’s Tale, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1985)



Dymkowski, Christine (ed.), The Tempest, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000)



Frey, Charles H., Shakespeare’s Vast Romance: A Study of ‘The Winter’s Tale’ (Columbia MO: University of Missouri Press, 1980)



Goldberg, Jonathan, Tempest in the Caribbean (Minneapolis MI: University of Minnesota Press, 2004)



Graff, Gerald, and James Phelan (eds.), ‘The Tempest’: A Case Study in Critical Controversy (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000)



Hamilton, Donna B., Virgil and ‘The Tempest’: The Politics of Imitation (Columbus OH: Ohio State University Press, 1990)



Hirst, David L., The Tempest, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1984)



Jackson, MacD. P., Defining Shakespeare: ‘Pericles’ as Test Case (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003)



Law, Ernest, Shakespeare’s ‘Tempest’ as Originally Produced at Court (London: For the Shakespeare Association [by] Chatto and Windus, 1920)



Lindley, David, The Tempest, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2003)



Marsh, Derick R. C., The Recurring Miracle: A Study of ‘Cymbeline’ and the Last Plays (Pietermaritzburg: University of Natal Press, 1962)



Potter, Lois, ‘The Two Noble Kinsmen: Spectacle and Narrative’, in The Show Within: Dramatic and Other Insets (English Renaissance Drama) 1550-1642, ed. François Laroque (Montpellier: Publications de l’Université Paul-Valéry-Montpellier III, 1992)



Richmond, Hugh M., King Henry VIII, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994)



Skeele, David, Thwarting the Wayward Seas: A Critical and Theatrical History of Shakespeare’s ‘Pericles’ in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (London: Associated University Presses, 1998)



Tatspaugh, Patricia E., The Winter’s Tale, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2002)



Vaughan, Alden T., and Virginia Mason Vaughan, Shakespeare’s Caliban: A Cultural History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991)



Warren, Roger, Cymbeline, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1989)



White, R. S. (ed.), The Tempest: William Shakespeare, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999)



Zabus, Chantal, Tempests after Shakespeare (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002)



The Roman Plays: Antony and Cleopatra, Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, Titus Andronicus



Adelman, Janet, The Common Liar: An Essay on ‘Antony and Cleopatra’ (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973)



Barroll, J. Leeds, Shakespearean Tragedy: Genre, Tradition and Change in ‘Antony and Cleopatra’ (London: Associated University Presses, 1984)



Dessen, Alan C., Titus Andronicus, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1989)



Drakakis, John (ed.), Antony and Cleopatra: William Shakespeare, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1994)



Lamb, Margaret, ‘Antony and Cleopatra’ on the English Stage (London: Associated University Presses, 1980)



Madelaine, Richard (ed.), Antony and Cleopatra, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)



Metz, G. Harold, Shakespeare’s Earliest Tragedy: Studies in ‘Titus Andronicus’ (London: Associated University Presses, 1996)



Poole, Adrian, Coriolanus, Harvester New Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1988)



Ripley, John, ‘Julius Caesar’ on Stage in England and America 1599-1973 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980)



—‘Coriolanus’ on Stage in England and America 1609-1994 (London: Associated University Presses, 1998)



Scott, Michael, Antony and Cleopatra, Text and Performance (London: Macmillan, 1983)



Steppat, Michael, The Critical Reception of Shakespeare’s ‘Antony and Cleopatra’ from 1607-1905, Bochumer anglistische Studien 9 (Amsterdam: Grüner, 1980)



Wilson, Richard, William Shakespeare: ‘Julius Caesar’, Penguin Critical Studies (London: Penguin, 1992)


Hamlet



Calderwood, James L., To Be and Not to Be: Negation and Metadrama in ‘Hamlet’ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983)



Clayton, Thomas (ed.), The ‘Hamlet’ First Published (QI, 1603): Origins, Form, Intertextualities (London: Associated University Presses, 1992)



Dawson, Anthony B., Hamlet, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1995)



Farley-Hills, David (ed.), Critical Responses to ‘Hamlet’ 1600- 1900, Vols I- (New York: AMS Press, 1996-)



Frye, Roland Mushat, The Renaissance ‘Hamlet’: Issues and Responses in 1600 (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984)



Greenblatt, Stephen, Hamlet in Purgatory (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001)



Jones, Ernest, Hamlet and Oedipus (London: Gollancz, 1949)



Kliman, Bernice W., ‘Hamlet’: Film, Television, and Audio Performance (London: Associated University Presses, 1988)



Pennington, Michael, ‘Hamlet’: A User’s Guide (London: Nick Hern, 1996)



Prosser, Eleanor, Hamlet and Revenge, 2nd edn. (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1971)



Rosenberg, Marvin, The Masks of ‘Hamlet’ (London: Associated University Presses, 1992)



Shakespeare, William, The Three-Text ‘Hamlet’: Parallel Texts of the First and Second Quartos and First Folio, eds. Paul Bertram and Bernice W. Kliman (New York: AMS Press, 1991)



Taylor, Gary, ‘Hamlet in Africa 1607’, in Ivo Kamps and Jyotsna Singh (eds.), Travel Knowledge: European ‘Discoveries’ in the Early Modern Period (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001)



Weitz, Morris, ‘Hamlet’ and the Philosophy of Literary Criticism (London: Faber and Faber, 1965)


King Lear



Blayney, Peter W. M., The Texts of ‘King Lear’ and their Origins, Vol. I: Nicholas Okes and the First Quarto (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982)



Bratton, J. S. (ed.), ‘King Lear’, William Shakespeare, Plays in Performance (Bristol: Bristol Classical Press, 1987)



Carson, Christie, and Jacky Bratton (eds.), The Cambridge ‘King Lear’ CD-ROM: Text and Performance Archive (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000)



Hawkes, Terence, William Shakespeare, ‘King Lear’, Writers and their Work (Plymouth: Northcote House in Association with the British Council, 1995)



Leggatt, Alexander, King Lear, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1991)



Lusardi, James P., and June Schlueter, Reading Shakespeare in Performance: ‘King Lear’ (London: Associated University Presses, 1991)



Mack, Maynard, ‘King Lear’ in Our Time (London: Methuen, 1966)



Reibetanz, John, The ‘Lear’ World: A Study of ‘King Lear’ in its Dramatic Context (London: Heinemann, 1977)



Rosenberg, Marvin, The Masks of ‘King Lear’ (Berkeley CA: University of California Press, 1972)



Ryan, Kiernan (ed.), ‘King Lear’: William Shakespeare, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993)



Salgado, Gamini, King Lear, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1984)



Stone, P. W. K., The Textual History of ‘King Lear’ (London: Scolar Press, 1980)



Taylor, Gary, ‘The War in King Lear’, Shakespeare Survey, 33 (1980), 27-34



—and Michael Warren (eds.), The Division of the Kingdoms: Shakespeare’s Two Versions of ‘King Lear’ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983)



Urkowitz, Steven, Shakespeare’s Revision of ‘King Lear’ (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980)


Macbeth



Bartholomeusz, Dennis, ‘Macbeth’ and the Players (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969)



Berger, Harry, Text against Performance: The Example of ‘Macbeth’ (Norman OK: University of Oklahoma, 1982)



Calderwood, James L., If It Were Done: ‘Macbeth’ and Tragic Action (Amherst MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1986)



Carroll, William C. (ed.), William Shakespeare, ‘Macbeth’: Texts and Contexts (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999)



Kliman, Bernice, Macbeth, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1992)



Rosenberg, Marvin, The Masks of ‘Macbeth’ (Berkeley CA: University of California, 1978)



Wain, John (ed.), Shakespeare, ‘Macbeth’, A Casebook, 2nd edn. (Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1994)



Williams, Gordon, Macbeth, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1985)


Othello



Adamson, Jane, ‘Othello’ as Tragedy: Some Problems of Judgement and Feeling (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980)



Hadfield, Andrew (ed.), A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Shakespeare’s ‘Othello’ (London: Routledge, 2003)



Hankey, Julie (ed.), ‘Othello’, William Shakespeare, Plays in Performance (Bristol: Bristol Classical Press, 1987)



Honigmann, E. A. J., The Texts of ‘Othello’ and Shakespearian Revision (London: Routledge, 1966)



Orlin, Lena Cowen (ed.), ‘Othello’: William Shakespeare, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004)



Pechter, Edward, ‘Othello’ and Interpretive Traditions (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1999)



Potter, Lois, Othello, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002)



Rosenberg, Marvin, The Masks of ‘Othello’: The Search for the Identity of Othello, Iago and Desdemona by Three Centuries of Actors and Critics (Berkeley CA: California University Press, 1961)



Vaughan, Virginia Mason, ‘Othello’: A Contextual History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994)



Wain, John (ed.), Shakespeare: ‘Othello’, A Casebook, rev. edn. (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1994)



Wine, Martin L., Othello, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1984)


Romeo and Juliet



Evans, Robert O., The Osier Cage: Rhetorical Devices in ‘Romeo and Juliet’ (Lexington KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1966)



Holding, Peter, Romeo and Juliet, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1992)



Jackson, Russell, Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2003)



Levenson, Jill, Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1987)



Loehlin, James N., Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002)



Porter, J. A., Shakespeare’s Mercutio: His History and Drama (Chapel Hill NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1988)



White, R. S. (ed.), ‘Romeo and Juliet’: William Shakespeare, New Casebooks (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001)



The First Tetralogy and King John: Henry VI Parts 1―3, Richard III



Clemen, Wolfgang, A Commentary on Shakespeare’s ‘Richard III’, English version by Jean Bonheim (London: Methuen, 1968) (First published in German 1957)



Colley, Scott, Richard’s Himself Again: A Stage History of ‘Richard III’ (New York: Greenwood Press, 1992)



Cousin, Geraldine, King John, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994)



Curren-Aquino, Deborah T. (ed.), ‘King John’: New Perspectives (London: Associated University Presses, 1989)



Day, Gillian, King Richard III, Shakespeare at Stratford (London: Arden Shakespeare, 2002)



Hankey, Julie (ed.), ‘Richard III’ by William Shakespeare, 2nd edn., Plays in Performance (Bristol: Bristol Classical Press, 1988)



Hassel, R. Chris, Songs of Death: Performance, Interpretation and the Text of ‘Richard III’ (Lincoln NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1987)



Montgomery, William, ‘The Original Staging of the First Part of the Contention (1594)’, Shakespeare Survey, 41 (1989), 13-22



Pendleton, Thomas A. (ed.), Henry VI: Critical Essays (London: Routledge, 2001)



Richmond, Hugh M., King Richard III, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1989)



Riggs, David, Shakespeare’s Heroical Histories: ‘Henry VI’ and Its Literary Tradition (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1971)



Shakespeare, William, The Tragedy of King Richard the Third: Parallel Texts of the First Quarto and First Folio with Variants of the Early Quartos, ed. Kristian Smidt (Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1969)



Taylor, Gary, ‘Shakespeare and Others: The Authorship of Henry the Sixth, Part One’, Medieval and Renaissance Drama in England, 7 (1995), 145―205



Walton, J. K., Copy for the Folio Text of ‘Richard III’ with a Note on the Copy of the Folio Text of ‘King Lear’ (Auckland NZ: Auckland University College, 1955)



The Second Tetralogy: Richard II, Henry IV Parts 1 and 2, Henry V



Brennan, Anthony, Henry V, Harvester New Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992)



Campbell, Lily B., Shakespeare’s ‘Histories’: Mirrors of Elizabethan Policy (San Marino CA: Huntington Library, 1968) (First published 1947)



Hodgdon, Barbara, Henry IV, Part Two, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993)



—(ed.), ‘The First Part of King Henry the Fourth’: Texts and Contexts (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1997)



Loehlin, James N., Henry V, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996)



McAlindon, Tom, Shakespeare’s Tudor History: A Study of ‘Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2’ (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001)



McMillin, Scott, Henry IV, Part One, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1991)



Meron, Theodor, Henry’s Wars and Shakespeare’s Laws: Perspectives on the Law of War in the Later Middle Ages (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993)



Page, Malcolm, Richard II, Text and Performance (Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1987)



Prosser, Eleanor, Shakespeare’s Anonymous Editors: Scribe and Compositor in the Folio Text of ‘2 Henry IV’ (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1981)



Shewring, Margaret, King Richard II, Shakespeare in Performance (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996)



Smith, Emma (ed.), King Henry V, Shakespeare in Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002)



Taylor, Gary, ‘The Fortunes of Oldcastle’, Shakespeare Survey, 38 (1985), 85―100



—‘Three Studies in the Text of Henry V’. in Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor, Modernizing Shakespeare’s Spelling, with Three Studies in the Text of ‘Henry V’ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979)



Wharton, T. F., Henry the Fourth, Parts 1 and 2, Text and Performance (London: Macmillan, 1983)


Edward III and Sir Thomas More



The Book of Sir Thomas Moore, Tudor Facsimile Texts (London: issued for subscribers by the editor of the Tudor Facsimile Texts, 1910)



Howard-Hill, T. H. (ed.), Shakespeare and ‘Sir Thomas More’: Essays on the Play and its Shakespearian Interest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989)



McMillin, Scott, The Elizabethan Theatre and ‘The Book of Sir Thomas More’ (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 1987)



Metz, G. Harold, Four Plays Ascribed to Shakespeare, An Annotated Bibliography: ‘The Reign of King Edward III’, ‘Sir Thomas More’, ‘The History of Cardenio’, and ‘The Two Noble Kinsmen’ (New York: Garland, 1982)



Pollard, Alfred, and others, Shakespeare’s Hand in ‘The Play of Sir Thomas More’: Papers by Alfred W. Pollard, W. W. Greg, E. Maunde Thompson, J. Dover Wilson and R. W. Chambers, with the text of the III May Day Scenes, edited by W. W. Greg (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1923)



Proudfoot, Richard, ‘The Reign of King Edward the Third (1596) and Shakespeare’, in British Academy Shakespeare Lectures 1980―89, introduced by E. A. J. Honigmann (Oxford: Oxford University Press for The British Academy, 1993)


Timon of Athens



Butler, Francelia, The Strange Critical Fortunes of Shakespeare’s ‘Timon of Athens’ (Ames IA: Iowa State University Press, 1966)



Nuttall, A. D., Timon of Athens, Harvester Critical Introductions to Shakespeare (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1989)



Soellner, Rolf, ‘Timon of Athens’: Shakespeare’s Pessimistic Tragedy, with a Stage History by Gary J. Williams (Columbus OH: Ohio State University Press, 1979)





Afterlife



Bate, Jonathan, The Genius of Shakespeare (London: Picador, 1997)



Cohn, Ruby, Modern Shakespeare Offshoots (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976)



Dobson, Michael, The Making of the National Poet: Shakespeare, Adaptation, and Authorship 1660―1769 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992)



Gager, Valerie L., Shakespeare and Dickens: The Dynamics of Influence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)



Gross, John (ed.), After Shakespeare: An Anthology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002)



Hartnoll, Phyllis (ed.), Shakespeare in Music (London: Macmillan, 1964)



Holderness, Graham (ed.), The Shakespeare Myth (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988)



Merchant, Moelwyn W., Shakespeare and the Artist (London: Oxford University Press, 1959)



Schmidgall, Gary, Shakespeare and Opera (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990)



Shutte, William M., Joyce and Shakespeare: A Study in the Meaning of ‘Ulysses’ (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1957)



Taylor, Gary, Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History from the Restoration to the Present (London: Hogarth, 1989)



Wells, Stanley, Shakespeare: For All Time (London: Macmillan, 2002)





A SELECT GLOSSARY





a, (as pronoun) familiar, unstressed form of ‘he’

abate, to shorten, take from, deprive, except, blunt

abatement, reduction, depreciation

abhor, disgust, protest against

abide, await the issue of, pay the penalty for

able, to vouch for

abode, delay, stay; to foretell

about, irregularly, indirectly; be on the move

abram, auburn

abridgement, reduction, pastime

abroad, away, apart, on foot, current, at large, outside

abrogate, abstain from

abruption, breaking off

absolute, complete, certain, positive, beyond doubt

Absyrtus, see MEDEA

abuse, wrong, ill-usage, deception; to deceive, dishonour

aby, pay the penalty for

accident, occurrence, event, incident

accite, summon, induce

accommodate, equip, adapt itself to

accommodation, comfort, entertainment

accomplish, equip, obtain

accountant, accountable

accoutred, dressed, equipped

acerb, bitter

Acheron, river of the underworld

achieve, make an end, finish; win, obtain

Achilles’ spear, a mythical spear: rust scraped from it cured a wound that it had inflicted

acknow, acknowledge

acknown, be acknown, confess knowledge

aconitum, poison

acquit, atone for, repay, release

Actaeon. Diana turned him into a stag because he saw her bathing; he was torn to pieces by his dogs

acture, action

adamant, impenetrably hard stone; magnet

addition mark of distinction, title

admiration, wonder, astonishment, marvel

admire, wonder, marvel

admittance, fashion, reception

adoptious christendoms, fond nicknames

advantage, opportunity, interest on money; to profit

adventure, chance, hazard, to risk

advertise, inform

advertisement, information, advice

advice, consideration, forethought

advised, cautious, aware, carefully considered

Aeneas, a Trojan prince who carried his father, Anchises, from the blazing city. Dido, Queen of Carthage, received him and his son, Ascanius. She fell in love with him, but he left Carthage at the gods’ command, and Dido committed suicide.

Aeolus, god of the winds

Aesculapius, god of medicine

affect, affection, tendency, disposition; love, like, imitate

affected, disposed, in love

affection, passion, desire, disposition, affectation

affeer, confirm

affiance, confidence

affined, related, obliged

affront, meet, confront

affy, trust, betroth

aflaunt, with a swagger

alter, according to, at the rate of

against, in expectation of, in preparation for the time when, in time for

Agenor, father of EUROPA

aglet-baby, tag in shape of a tiny figure

agnize, confess, acknowledge

aim, target, guess

Ajax, a strong, dim-witted Greek hero; mad with anger at not being given the arms of the dead Achilles he slaughtered a flock of sheep as if they were human enemies and killed himself

alarum, call to arms, assault

Alcides, HERCULES

alder-liefest, dearest of all

Alecto, one of the furies; her head was wreathed with serpents

allay, relief; to qualify

All-hallond eve, Halloween, the eve of All Saints’ Day

Allhallowmas, All Saints’ Day (I November)

All-hallown summer, fine weather in late autumn

allowance, admission of a claim, reputation

alter, exchange

Althaea. Her son, Meleager, was fated to live until a brand of fire burned away. After he killed her brothers she burned it.

amerce, punish with a fine

ames ace, two aces, lowest possible throw at dice

amort, spiritless, dejected

an, if, though, whether, as if

anatomize, dissect, lay bare

anatomy, skeleton

Anchises, see AENEAS

anchor, hermit

angel, gold coin

Anna, sister of Dido of Carthage (see AENEAS)

anon, soon, ‘coming’

Anthropophagi, cannibals

antic, grotesque pageant, clown; fantastic

antre, cave

ape, to lead apes in hell, an old maid’s function

Apollo, god of the sun, music and poetry. Daphne, escaping from his pursuit, was changed to a laurel.

appaid, contented, satisfied

apparently, openly

appeach, inform against

appeal, accusation; to accuse

apple-john, apple eaten when shrivelled

appliance, service, remedy, treatment

appointment, equipment, instruction

apprehensive, lively, quick-witted

approof, proof, trial, approval

appropriate, make specially

approve, prove, show to be true, confirm, put to the proof, test, convict

apt, willing, impressionable

Aquilon, north wind

Arabian bird, phoenix

argosy, large merchant ship

argue, prove, show

argument, proof, subject of debate, subject matter, summary

Ariadne, deserted by her lover, Theseus

Arion, a singer carried ashore by a dolphin

arm, reach, take in one’s arms

arm-jaunced, jolted by armour

armipotent, powerful in arms

aroint thee, be gone

arras, wall-tapestry

articulate, arrange terms, specify

artificial, made by art, skilled, skilful

artist, scholar, doctor

Ascanius, see AENEAS

asnico, ass

aspect, look, glance, position and influence of a planet, sight

aspersion, sprinkling

assay, trial, attempt

assubjugate, debase

assurance, pledge, deed of conveyance, guarantee

assure, betroth, convey property

Astraca, goddess of justice

Atalanta, maiden huntress who killed the suitors she outraced

Ate, goddess of mischief and destruction

atomy, atom, mote

atone, reconcile, unite, agree

atonement, reconciliation

Atropos, one of the three fates; her duty was to cut the thread of life

attach, arrest, seize

attachment, arrest, stop

attaint, conviction, infection; infect, convict of treason, disgrace

attribute, reputation, credit

attribution, praise

aught, anything

aunt, old woman, bawd, girl friend

austringer, falconer

avoid, get rid of, get out of

awkward, oblique, not straightforward





back friend, pretended friend

back-sword, sword with only one cutting edge

baffle, disgrace

bait, set dogs on, worry, persecute, entice with bait, feed, feast

balk, let slip, quibble, heap

ballow, cudgel

ban, to curse

Banbury cheese, proverbially thin

bandog, fierce chained dog

banquet, dessert, light meal of fruit and sweetmeats

barge, large ornamental vessel used on state occasions

barque, ship

bases, skirt-like garment worn by a knight

Basilisco-like, like Basilisco, a braggart knight in the play Soliman and Perseda

basilisk, fabulous reptile whose look was fatal, large cannon

basta, enough!

bastard, sweet Spanish wine

baste, beat

bastinado, beating

bate, trouble; beat wings ready for flight, blunt, reduce, grow less, deduct

bateless, not to be blunted

bat-fowling, catching birds at night

batlet, bat used in washing clothes

bauble, jester’s stick

bavin, brush-wood

bawd, procurer (male or female)

beadle, parish officer with power to punish

beadsman, one who prays for another

bearherd, bear-keeper

bearing cloth, christening garment

beaver, visor, helmet

bedlam, lunatic hospital, lunatic

beetle, heavy hammer-like tool; overhang

beldam, grandmother, hag

bell-wether, castrated ram with a bell round its neck

be-mete, measure

bemoiled, covered with mud

Bench, King’s Bench (a high court)

bench, raise to authority, sit as judge

bench-hole, privy

bend, look, glance; to turn, incline, direct, strain, submit

bent, inclination, direction, tension, force, range, aim

berayed, defiled

bergamask, a rustic dance

besonian, beggar, scoundrel

besort, suitable company; to suit

beteem, pour over, grant

bewray, reveal

bias, in bowls, weight which makes a bowl swerve; natural bent, inclination, compelling influence

bigamy, marriage with widow(er)

biggin, nightcap

bilbo, finely-tempered sword

bilboes, shackles

bill, halberd, pike, note, catalogue, label

birdbolt, blunt-headed arrow for shooting birds

bisson, partly blind, blinding

blank, blank page or charter, white mark in centre of target, aim, range; to make pale

blazon, coat of arms, description, proclamation; to proclaim, praise

blood-baltered, stained with clots of blood

blow, swell, blossom, (of flies) deposit eggs (on), defile

blowse, chubby girl

bluecap, Scotsman

blunt, make light of

board, to address, make advances to, mount sexually

bob, taunt, mock, cheat, get by trickery, pummel

bodkin, dagger, hair-pin or ornament

boll’n, swollen

bolt, broad-headed arrow, shackle; to sieve, fetter

bolter, sieve

bolting-hutch, sifting-bin

bombard, leather jug or bottle

bombast, cotton-wool padding for clothes, bombastic

bona-roba, well dressed prostitute

bone-ache, syphilis

boot, booty, profit, advantage, help, use, avail, addition; to be of use, profit, present in addition

Boreas, north wind

borrow, receive, assume, counterfeit

bosky, wooded

botchy, ulcerous

bots, disease of horses caused by worms

bottom, ship, valley, bobbin; to wind on a bobbin

bounce, bang

boy, rogue

brabble, brawl

brace, suit of armour, readiness

brach, hound, bitch

braid, deceitful; to reproach

branched, patterned as with branches

brave, finely dressed, splendid, excellent; bravado or threat; to adorn, challenge, defy, swagger, taunt

bravery, bravado, finery, splendour, ostentation, defiance

brawl, French dance; quarrel

break-neck, ruinous course of action

breast, voice, stomach

breathe, speak, exercise, rest

breathed, exercised, valiant, inspired

breese, gadfly

brewis, bread soaked in broth

Briareus, hundred-handed giant

brief, letter, summary

broke, bargain

broken, (of music) in parts, scored for different instruments

broker, agent, go-between, pawnbroker

Brownist, member of a Puritan sect founded by Robert Browne

bruised, crushed, battered

bruit, rumour, report; to announce

bubuncle, facial eruption

buck, washing, dirty clothes for washing

buckler, shield

Bucklersbury, street of apothecaries’ and druggists’ shops off Cheapside

budget, wallet, bag

buff, strong leather used for coats of bailiffs and legal officers

bug, bogey, terror

bugle, bead, hunting-horn

bulk, body, stall in front of a shop

bully, friend, fine fellow

bumbaste, thrash the backside

bung, pickpocket

burgonet, helmet

burn, infect with venereal disease

buss, kiss





cabin, den

cabinet, dwelling

cacodemon, evil spirit

caddis, woollen tape

cade, barrel

caduceus, Mercury’s magic wand entwined by two serpents

caitiff, wretch, miserable person

caliver, light musket

callet, whore

Cambyses, hero of a bombastic tragedy

can, to know, be skilled in

canary, lively dance, light sweet wine

cantle, segment

canvass, toss (as in a blanket)

capable, able to receive, feel, or understand

capacity, understanding

cap-à-pie, from head to foot

capitulate, specify terms

captious, capacious

carbonado, meat scored across for cooking

carcanet, necklace

card, playing card, compass card; mix, debase

carl, carlot, peasant

carnation, flesh-colour

carrack, galleon

carriage, ability to bear

carve, cut, shape, invite with look and gesture

case, vagina

cast, throw of dice, tinge, founding; to throw, vomit; reckon, add

casual, accidental, subject to accident

cataplasm, poultice

catastrophe, outcome, end, rear

cater, purchaser of household supplies

caterpillar, extortioner, parasite

cates, food, delicacies

catling, catgut string

cautel, trick, deceit

cautelous, deceitful

censure, judgement, blame; judge, estimate

centre, centre of the earth or the universe

Cerberus, three-headed dog of the underworld

cerecloth, cerements, winding-sheet

ceremonious, punctilious about ritual

Ceres, goddess of agriculture

certain, fixed

cess, death; out of all cess, beyond all measure

challenge, claim, accuse

chamber-lye, urine

chamblet, light fabric

champaign, open country

changeling, waverer

chape, sheath

chapman, merchant, customer

chaps, jaws

character, writing, hand-writing; to write

charactery, writing

charneco, Portuguese wine

Charon, ferryman of the underworld

chaudron, entrails

cheapen, bargain, bid for

cheater, officer appointed to look after property forfeited to the king

check, rebuke

cheerly, cheerfully

cherry-pit, game of throwing cherry stones into a little hole

cheverel, kid leather, pliant and easily stretched

child, baby girl, youth of noble birth

childing, fertile

chopine, shoe with high platform-sole

cicatrice, scar, impression

cinquepace, lively dance

cipher, zero, nought; to express, decipher

cittern, wire-stringed instrument

civil, of the city, well-ordered

clack-dish, begging bowl

clapperclaw, maul, thrash

cleave, attach themselves

clepe, call

clerk, scholar

clew, ball of thread

climate, region, dwell

cling, shrivel

clinquant, glittering

clip, embrace

closure, bound, enelnaure, conclusion

clown, rustic, jester

clyster, enema

cockney, milksop, squeamish or affected woman

cod, testicle

codpiece, bag-shaped flap on breeches, covering the genitals, tied with laces, often embroidered and padded

coffin, pastry case

cog, cheat, flatter

coign, corner-stone, corner

coil, noisy disturbance, fuss, trouble

Colbrand, legendary Danish giant

collection, inference, understanding

collied, darkened

collop, slice, offspring

colour, pretext, excuse

colours, military ensigns

colt, young fool; to make a fool of; to have sexual intercourse with

co-mart, agreement, bargain

commodity, commercial privileges, expediency, advantage, consignment

companion, knave

comparative, proportionate, full of comparisons; one who assumes equality

competitor, associate, partner

complexion, bodily habit or constitution, temperament, appearance, colour

complot, conspiracy

composition, consistency, agreement

con, learn by heart

conceit, idea, device, apprehension, understanding, opinion, judgement, fancy, imagination, fancy trifle; to think, estimate

conceited, full of imagination, ingenious, having a certain opinion

conclusion, experiment, riddle

condolement, mourning

conference, conversation, talk, discussion

confiner, inhabitant

congree, harmonize

conscience, knowledge, understanding, scruple

conscionable, ruled by conscience

consign, agree, yield up possession

consist, insist

conspectuity, sight

contain, keep

continent, container, sum; restrained, temperate

controller, detractor

convenience, fitness, advantage

convent, convene, summon

conversation, intercourse, behaviour

convert, turn, change

convey, lead away, carry

conveyance, underhand dealing

convince, overcome

convive, feast together

convoy, means of conveyance

cony, rabbit

cony-catch, cheat

copatain, highcrowned

cope, sky; have to do with, encounter, recompense

copped, peaked

copy, original; subject matter, copyholdtenure

coranto, a dance

Corinthian, reveller

corky, withered

Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, model of Roman motherhood

cornett, a brass instrument, capable of great brilliance

cornuto, cuckold, deceived husband

corollary, surplus

costard, an apple; the head

cote, cottage; pass by

cotquean, ‘old woman’, man who interferes in housekeeping

couch, hide, lie hidden, make crouch

counsel, secret, secret purpose or thought

Counter, debtors’ prison

counterpoint, quilt, counterpane

countervail, equal, counter-balance

court-cupboard, sideboard

cousin, nephew, kinsman, relative

cowl-staff, pole on which a ‘cowl’ (or basket) is carried

coxcomb, fool’s cap, fool, head

coy, scorn, stroke

cozen, cheat

cozier, cobbler

crackhemp, gallows-bird, one born (or deserving) to be hanged

crank, twist; wind

crant, wreath

crare, small trading vessel

crave, require

craze, break

credent, believing, credible

credit, credibility, reputation, report

crestfallen, humbled, abased

cresset, fire-basket, torch

cricket, low stool

crow-keeper, one employed to drive away crows

crusado, Portuguese coin

cry, pack of hounds; yelp in following scent

cubiculo, bedroom

cullion, testicle (term of abuse)

culverin, large cannon

cunning, knowledge, skill; ingenious

Cupid, god of love, son of Venus and Mars (or Mercury), usually thought of as a boy armed with bow and arrows

curate, parish priest

curiosity, exactness, over-scrupulousness, delicacy

curious, anxious, needing care, fastidious, difficult to please, delicate, beautifully made; delicately

curst, shrewish, cross, cantankerous, malignant, fierce

curtal, having the tail docked

curtal-axe, cutlass

customer, prostitute

cut, docked or gelded horse; vulva

Cyclops, one of a race of one-eyed giants, workmen for Vulcan the smith.

cyme, medicinal plant

Cynthia, goddess of the moon

cypress, fine lawn fabric

Cytherea, Venus, goddess of love





Daedalus, with his son Icarus, escaped from imprisonment on home-made wings. Icarus flew too high, the sun melted the wax, and he was drowned. Daedalus escaped.

danger, harm, injury, power to harm, range (of a weapon), debt

Daphne, see APOLLO

dare, dazzle

date, time, term, term of life, end

daub, cover with false show; daub it, pretend

dear, important, energetic, dire

debile, weak

Deborah, prophetess who inspired Israel to victory

decimation, execution of every tenth man

decoct, heat

defeat, destruction; to ruin, destroy, disfigure, defraud

defeature, disfigurement

defend, forbid

defunction, death

defunctive, funereal

delightsome, delightful, delighted

demerit, merit, sin

denier, copper coin of little value

denunciation, formal declaration

deplore, tell with grief

depose, swear, examine on oath

deprave, defame

deputation, office of deputy

deracinate, uproot

derive, inherit, descend, bring down on, draw

dern, dark, drear

desperately, recklessly

determinate, fix; ended, decisive, intended

determination, ending, decision, intention

determine, end, settle, decide

Deucalion, the Greek Noah

dexter, right

dey-woman, dairy-woman

Diana, goddess of hunting, the moon, and chastity

diaper, table napkin

dich, attach to

Dido, see AENEAS

diffidence, distrust, suspicion

diffused, confused, disordered

dilate, relate, express at length

dildo, penis, phallus; used in ballad refrains

dime, tenth man

Dis, god of the underworld

disable, impair, disparage

disappointed, unprepared

discase, undress

discourse, reasoning, talk, conversational power, familiarity

discover, uncover, reveal, make known, recognize, spy out, reconnoitre

disease, trouble, annoyance; to disturb

disedge, dull the appetite, sate

disgrace, insult; disfigurement, disfavour

disgracious, disliked, out of favour

dishabit, dislodge

dishonest, dishonourable, unchaste, immoral

dishonesty, dishonour, immorality

dislike, disagreement, disapproval; to displease

disliken, disguise

dismiss, forgive

dismission, dismissal

dismount, lower, draw from sheath

dispiteous, pitiless

displeased, angry

dispose, disposal, control, disposition, temperament, manner; to control, direct, incline, come to terms

disputable, argumentative

distain, stain, defile

distemper, ill humour, illness of mind or body, intoxication; disturb, disorder

distemperature, intemperateness of weather, illness, ailment, disturbance of mind

distinction, discrimination

distinctly, separately, individually

distract, divide, perplex, drive mad

distrain, seize

distressful, hard-earned

dive-dapper, dabchick, little grebe

division, variation, modulation, disposition

divulge, proclaim

do, copulate (with)

doctrine, lesson, learning

document, lesson

dogged, cruel

doit, coin worth half a farthing, a minute sum

dole, portion, share, grief, sorrow

domineer, feast riotously

dominical, red-printed letter in calendar marking the Sundays

doom, judgement

double, false, deceitful; wraith

doubt, suspicion, fear; to suspect, fear

dout, extinguish

dowlas, coarse linen

dowle, downy feather

doxy, beggar’s wench

draff, pigwash

draught, cesspool, privy

draw, withdraw, empty, search for game, track by scent

drawer, tapster

dress, train, groom

dressing, trimming

dribbling, falling short or wide of the mark

drift, purpose, plot, shower

drollery, puppet-show, comic picture

drumble, move slowly

drybeat, beat soundly

dudgeon, hilt of a dagger

duello, duelling code

dump, mournful tune or song

dun, dark; dun horse

dup, open

durance, durability, strong and durable cloth, imprisonment





eager, sour, bitter

ean, to bring forth (lambs)

eanling, young lamb

ear, plough

ecstasy, excitement, trance, madness

edge, appetite, desire

effectual, pertinent, to the point

eftest, easiest

eftsoons, soon

egg, epitome of worthlessness; take eggs for money, accept injury tamely

eisel, vinegar

eld, old age, ancient time

elder gun, pop-gun made from elder wood

element, sky, pl, atmospheric powers

elf, tangle

embarquement, embargo, prohibition

emboss, to drive (a hunted animal) to extremity

embossed, swollen, foaming at the mouth

embowel, disembowel

empiric, quack

emulation, ambitious rivalry, grudge, envy

emulator, disparager

encompassment, winding course, ‘talking round’ a subject

enew, drive into water

engine, artifice, plot, mechanical contrivance, rack

engross, write out in a fair hand; collect, monopolize, fallen

enlarge, set free

enlargement, release, liberty

enormous, disordered, irregular

ensconce, shelter, hide

enseamed, defiled with sweat

ensear, dry up

enshield, concealed, emblazoned

ensteeped, lying under water

entertainment, employment

entreat, treat, negotiate, intercede

entreatment, entering into negotiation

envy, malice, enmity; show malice towards

Ephesian, boon companion

epicurism, luxury, excess

equally, justly, impartially

Erebus, place of darkness, hell

erected, active, attentive

ergo, therefore

eringo, aphrodisiac sweetmeat

erne, grieve

erst, formerly

escot, support financially

espial, spy

estimable, appraising

estimate, valuation, value, repute

estimation, value, thing of value, esteem, reputation, conjecture

estridge, goshawk

Europa, carried away by Jupiter who had taken the form of a bull

event, outcome, issue, result

evidence, evidential documents, title-deeds

evitate, avoid

exception, objection, dissatisfaction

exclamation, loud reproach

excrement, growth (of hair)

excursion, rush, passage of arms

exempt, cut off

exhalation, meteor

exhale, draw forth

exhaust, draw out

exhibit, to submit, present

exhibition, allowance of money, gift

expectancy, hope

expedience, speed, expedition

expedient, speedy, direct

expeditious, immediate, urgent

experimental, of experience

expiate, end

extemp’rically, with skill in improvisation

extend, be lavish in praise, exaggerate the worth of, take by force

extent, seizure of property in execution of a writ, attack

extirp, root out

extracting, distracting

extravagancy, wandering

extravagant, straying, vagrant

eyas, young hawk

eyas-musket, young sparrow-hawk

eye-glass, retina, eye’s lens

eyestrings, muscles or nerves of eye





face, appearance, appearance of right; to put on a false appearance, brave, bully, brazen, trim

facinorous, vile

fact, deed, crime

factious, seditious

factor, agent

faculty, disposition, quality

fadge, be suitable, succeed

fading, refrain of a song

fail, failure, fault; to offend, die

fain, glad, obliged

fairing, gift

faithed, believed

faitor, cheat, rogue

falchion, sword, scimitar

falling sickness, epilepsy

falsing, deceptive

fame, rumour, report, reputation; make famous

familiar, attendant spirit

fancy, love, whimsicality; to love, fall in love with

fang, seize

fangled, foppish

fantastic, imaginary, fanciful, extravagant

fantasy, delusion, imagination, fancy, whim

fap, drunk

farce, to cram, stuff

farced, stuffed out

fardel, bundle, burden

farm, lease

farthingale, hooped petticoat

fashions, disease of horses

fault, lack, (in hunting) break in the scent

favour, leniency, something given as a mark of favour, badge, charm, appearance, look, face, feature

feat, dexterous, graceful; show to advantage; deed

feature, shape, form, comeliness

fedary, federary, confederate, accomplice

feed, pasture

feeder, servant, parasite, shepherd

fee-farm, fixed rent for perpetual tenancy

fee-grief, individual sorrow

fee-simple, estate belonging to owner and his heirs for ever, absolute possession

felicitate, happy

fell, fierce, cruel, enraged; skin, covering of hair or wool, fleece

felly, section of rim of wooden wheel

fence, art of fencing, defence; to defend

fere, spouse

fern seed, believed to be invisible and to confer invisibility

ferret, worry

festinate, hasty

fetch, stratagem, trick; to draw, derive, strike a blow

fettle, make ready

fig, to insult with a ‘figo’

fig of Spain, figo, fico, scornful gesture made by thrusting the thumb between two of the closed fingers or into the mouth.

fight, screen for protection of crew in sea battle

file, catalogue, list, roll, rank, number; to smooth, polish, defile

fill, fulfil

fill-horse, shaft horse

film, fine mesh

fine, end; to end, pay, fix as sum payable, punish

fire-drake, fiery dragon, meteor

firk, thrash

fitchew, polecat

fitment, fit equipment, fitting office

fives, strangles (a horse disease)

flap-dragon a raisin in burning brandy; to swallow as a flap-dragon

flapjack, pancake

flatness, completeness

flaw, flake of snow, gust, fragment, fault, outburst; to crack, break

fleckled, dappled

fledge, fledged, covered with down

fleer, mock, sneer; to gibe

flesh, initiate in bloodshed, inflame, gratify

fleshment, excitement resulting from a first success

flewed, having large chaps

flight, fleet, swiftly moving

flirt-jill, woman of loose character

float, sea

flourish, gloss, embellishment, florid decoration, fanfare of trumpets

flush, full, lusty

flux, discharge, flowing, stream

fob, cheat, trick

foin, thrust

foison, harvest, plentiful crop

fond, foolish, silly, trivial, eager, desirous

fool, professional jester, term of endearment or pity, plaything

foot, see FOUTRE

footcloth, saddle cloth

fop, to dupe, fool

foppery, folly, deceit

foppish, foolish

forage, preying

forbid, cursed

fordo, kill, destroy

fordone, exhausted

forecast, foresight

forehorse, first in team

forespent, previously spent, past

forestall, condemn in advance

forgetive, inventive

fork, forked tongue, barbed arrow-head

forked, horned

formal, traditional, dignified, sane

formality, decorum, regularity

former, foremost

forsake, refuse, reject, renounce

forslow, delay

forspent, exhausted

fortitude, strength

forwhy, because

foutre, strong expression of contempt, a fuck (French)

fox, kind of sword

fracted, broken

fraction, discord, quarrel, fragment

frame, contriving, structure, plan; to prepare, go, bring to pass, perform

frampold, disagreeable

franchise, freedom, privilege

franchised, free

frank, unrestrained, generous, free; sty; to pen up in a sty

franklin, yeoman

fray, affray, skirmish; to frighten

free, generous, magnanimous, innocent, untroubled; to absolve, banish

French crown, French coin, baldness produced by venereal disease

frequent, addicted, familiar

friend, lover, mistress, relative

frieze, coarse woollen cloth

frippery, old-clothes’ shop

front, forehead; face, foremost line of battle, beginning; to confront, oppose

frontlet, band worn on forehead

froward, perverse, wilful, rebellious

frush, smash

fullam, false dice

fulsome, pregnant, loathsome, filthy

furnishings, externals

furniture, equipment, harness

fury, rage, passion, poetic passion, goddess of vengeance

fustian, coarse cloth, bombastic gibberish





gaberdine, loose-fitting coat or cloak

gag, prop open, or jerk open

gage, pledge; to stake, bind, engage

gain-giving, misgiving

Galen, famous physician of second century

gall, resentment, bitterness; to rub sore, chafe, graze, wound, harass, scoff

galliard, lively dance

galliass, large, heavy ship

galloglasses, heavily-armed foot-soldiers of Ireland or the Western Isles

gallow, frighten

gallows, gallows-bird, one born (or deserving) to be hanged

gamut, musical scale

garboil, disturbance, quarrel

Gargantua, large-mouthed giant in Rabelais

garland, royal crown, glory

garnish, dress; to adorn, equip

gaskins, breeches

gaud, plaything, showy ornament; to ornament

gear, stuff, talk, matter, business

geck, dupe

gender, kind, sort, offspring; engender

generosity, high birth

generous, high-born

genius, spirit, good or bad angel, embodied spirit

gentle, of noble birth; to ennoble

gentry, rank by birth, good breeding, courtesy

George, jewel bearing figure of the saint, part of insignia of Order of the Garter

germen, seed

gest, deed, time allotted to stage of journey

gesture, bearing

ghasted, frightened

ghastness, terror

ghastly, spiritual

gig, whipping-top

giglet, wanton

gimmaled, jointed, hinged

ging, gang

gird, gibe; taunt, besiege

glance (at), hint at, cast a slight on

glass, mirror, sand-glass

glaze, stare

gleek, gibe; to gibe, jest

glib, castrate

gloss, lustre

glut, swallow

go, walk

God-a-mercy, thank God

God’s me, God bless me

go to! expression of disapproval, protest, or disbelief

goatish, lustful

good, financially sound, rich

good-brother, brother-in-law

goodman, husband, yeoman, master

goose, smoothing iron

goose of Winchester, prostitute

gorbellied, fat-bellied

gore, to defile, wound

gorge, what has been swallowed

gorget, piece of armour for the throat

Gorgon, woman whose look turned the beholder to stone

gossip, god-father or -mother, sponsor; make merry

gourd, kind of false dice

gout, drop

government, control, self-command, evenness of temper

grained, ingrained, showing grain of the wood, lined, forked

gramercy, thank you

grange, outlying farmhouse

gratify, thank, reward, pay, do honour to

gratulate, pleasing; greet, express joy at

gravel, urinary crystals

greasily, obscenely

grece, step, stair, degree

gree, agree

grief, grievances

grieve, vex, taunt

groat, fourpenny piece

groundlings, those who stood in the cheapest part of the theatre

grow, be or become due

guard, caution, border, trimming; to ornament

guidon, pennant

guiled, treacherous

guinea-hen, prostitute

guise, custom, habit

gules, red (heraldry)

gull, unfledged bird, dupe, fool, trick; to cheat

gummed, stiffened with gum

gust, taste, relish

Guy, Guy of Warwick, slayer of the giant Colbrand

gyve, fetter





habit, dress, appearance

habitude, temperament

hackney, prostitute

haggard, wild hawk

haggle, to hack, gash

hag-seed, child of a witch

hai, home-thrust in fencing

hair, kind, character

halcyon, kingfisher

half, partner

half-blooded, of noble blood by one parent only

half-cheek, profile

half-cheeked, with a piece missing or broken on one side

half-face, thin face

half-faced, showing half the face

half-sword, half a sword’s length

halidom, holy relic

Hallowmas, All Saints’ Day, I November

handfast, firm hold, marriage contract

handicrafts, artisans, workmen

handy-dandy, choose which you please (in a children’s game)

haply, perhaps, by chance

happiness, handsomeness, appropriateness, opportunity

hardiment, bold exploit

hardness, difficult, hardship

harlot, man or woman of promiscuous life

harlotry, harlot, silly wench

hatch, engrave, inlay, lower half of a divided door

hatchment, memorial tablet with coat of arms

hautboy, shawm, woodwind instrument, ancestor of the oboe

havoc, devastation; cry havoc, give the signal to an army to plunder

hazard, game at dice, chance, venture

head, headland, topic, army

head borough, parish officer

heap, crowd

heavy, important, dull, sluggish, sleepy, grievous

hectic, wasting fever

Hector, Trojan hero

Hecuba, Queen of Troy, wife of Priam and mother of Hector

hedge-pig, hedgehog

Helen, most beautiful woman of her world, wife of the Greek Menelaus, carried off to Troy by Paris

Helicon, mountain of Greece sacred to the Muses

hemp-seed, gallows-bird, one born (or deserving) to be hanged

Hercules, as a baby strangled two serpents; performed twelve great labours, including the obtaining of the golden apples of the Hesperides and the overcoming of Cerberus, the three-headed dog of the underworld

Hero, see LEANDER

Hesperus, the evening star

hest, command

heyday, excitement

high-crested, proud

high-lone, quite alone, without support

high-proof, in the highest degree

high-stomached, haughty

hight, called

hilding, contemptible, good-for-nothing, baggage

him, male (dog)

hint, occasion, reason, opportunity

hipped, lame in the hip

hit, succeed, agree

hive, hive-shaped hat

hoar, grow mouldy

hobby-horse, figure of a horse used in morris dances, etc., buffoon, prostitute

holding, consistency, burden of a song

holp, helped

honest, worthy, virtuous, chaste

honesty, honour, decency, chastity

honour, chastity

hoodman-blind, blind man’s buff

horn, the mark of a cuckold

horn-book, child’s first reader

horn-mad, ready to gore the enemy, enraged at being cuckolded

hose, stockings, breeches

host, lodge

hot-house, brothel

housekeeper, householder, watch-dog, stay-at-home

housekeeping, hospitable running of the household

hox, hamstring

hoy, a small vessel

hugger-mugger, secrecy

hull, float, drift with sails furled

humorous, moist, capricious, moody

humour, moisture; bodily fluid supposedly composed of blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy, the proportions determining personal temperament; temperament, mood, whim, caprice, inclination

Hungarian, hungry, needy

hunt’s-up, morning-song to arouse huntsmen

hurly, commotion, uproar

hurricano, waterspout

hurry, commotion, disorder

hurtless, harmless, unhurting

husband, one who keeps house; to farm, till

husbandry, management, thrift

Hybla, mountain in Sicily famous for fragrant flowers and honey

Hydra, many-headed snake whose heads grew again as they were cut off

Hymen, god ofmarriage

Hyperion, sun god





Icarus, see DAEDALUS

idea, image

Ides of March, according to the old Roman calendar, 15 March

idle, empty, trifling, worthless, useless, foolish, out of one’s mind

ignis fatuus, will-o’-the-wisp

Ilion, Ilium, citadel of Troy

image, likeness, copy, representation, sign, embodiment, idea

imbecility, weakness

imbrue, pierce, shed blood of

immanity, cruelty

imminence, impending evil

immodest, arrogant, immoderate

immoment, insignificant

imp, young shoot, child; to engraft feathers into a bird’s wing

impart, afford, make known

impartment, communication

impeach, accusation, reproach; to accuse, challenge, discredit

impeachment, accusation, detriment, hindrance

impertinency, irrelevancy, ramblings

impertinent, irrelevant

imply, involve

import, involve, imply, express, be important, concern, portend

importable, unbearable

importance, matter, meaning, importunity

importancy, significance

important, importunate, urgent

importless, meaningless, trivial

imposition, imputation, accusation, command

impostume, abscess

impress, impression, to stamp

imputation, reputation

incapable, unable to receive or realize

incident, about to happen

inclining, compliant; party, inclination

incomprehensible, boundless

incontinently, immediately

incorpsed, made one body

incorrect, unchastened, rebellious

incredulous, incredible

index, table of contents, preface

indifferency, impartiality, moderate size

indifferent, impartial, ordinary; tolerably, fairly

indigest, unformed, unformed mass

indign, unworthy

indirection, roundabout method, dishonest practice

indirectly, wrongfully, evasively, by suggestion, inattentively

indiscreet, lacking judgement

indiscretion, want of judgement

indisposition, disinclination

indistinguishable, mongrel

indrenched, waterlogged

infect, affect with some feeling

influence, supposed flowing from the heavens of an ethereal fluid acting on human character and destiny, inspiration

inform, take shape, inspire, instruct

infuse, shed, imbue

ingenious, talented, intelligent, discerning, skilfully contrived

ingling, engaging in sexual play

inhabitable, uninhabitable

inherit, possess

inhibit, prohibit

inhibition, prohibition

injurious, insulting, malicious

inkle, linen tape, thread, or yarn

inland, of the central, more cultured, part of a country

innocent, idiot, half-wit

innovation, insurrection

inoculate, engraft by budding

insensible, imperceptible to senses

insinuate, ingratiate, suggest

insinuation, ingratiation, hint

instance, cause, detail, proof, mark, presence

intellect, meaning, content

intelligence, communication, information, news, obtaining of secret information, spy; to pass information

intelligencer, agent

intelligencing, informative

intelligent, giving information, open, informative

intemperature, wildness, intemperance

intenable, unretentive

intendment, purpose, intention

intercept, interrupt

intercourse, commerce, business

interest, right, title, share

interressed, invested right or share

interlude, entertainment, play

intrenchant, invulnerable

intrinse, intrinsicate, closely entwined

investments, vestments, clothes

irreconciled, unexpiated

irregular, irregulous, lawless

iterance, repetition

iwis, indeed, certainly





Jack, jack, fellow, scoundrel, figure striking the hall on a clock; key of a virginal, smaller bowl aimed at, quarter of a pint

Jack-a-lent, puppet set up as target during Lent

jade, horse of poor condition or vicious temper, term of contempt; to wear out, make a fool of

jakes, privy

jaunce, prance, trudge up and down

jay, a flashy whore

jealous, suspicious, afraid, apprehensive, doubtful

jealousy, suspicion, apprehension, mistrust

jennet, small Spanish horse

jess, strap attached to the leg of a trained hawk

jet, strut, encroach

jig, quick lively dance, short lively comic entertainment

jointress, dowager

jollity, finery

jolthead, block-head

jordan, chamber-pot

journal, daily

journey-bated, exhausted with travel

Jove, poetic form of JUPITER

jowl, strike, knock

jump, just, precisely; hazard; to hazard, agree, coincide

junket, sweetmeat, delicacy

Juno, queen of the gods and wife of Jupiter; goddess ofmarriage

Jupiter, ruler of the gods. He was thought to hurl thunderbolts at mortals who displeased him, but otherwise was best known for his many amorous adventures.

just, true, honourable, exact

justicer, judge

justify, maintain the innocence of, vindicate, prove, corroborate

justly, with good reason

jut, encroach





keech, fat of slaughtered animal rolled into a lump

keel, skim

ken, range of sight; to see, recognize, know

kennel, pack, gutter

kern, light-armed Irish foot-soldier

kersey, homely; coarse woollen material

kibe, chilblain

kind, natural, tender, courteous, affectionate; nature, way, race, sort

kindle, bring forth

kindly, naturally, properly, exactly

knack, trifle, knick-knack

knap, nibble, strike

knot, fancifully laid-out flower bed or garden plot





laager, camp

label, slip of paper, strip of paper or parchment by which a seal is attached; to

add as a codicil

laboured, worn out, highly finished

laboursome, elaborate

lace, to ornament

lading, cargo, merchandise

lag, last, late

lampass, disease of the horse in which flesh swells behind front teeth

land-damn, damn in this world

lank, become thin

lantern, window-turret

lard, fatten, garnish

large, generous, lavish, free, improper

latch, strike, catch, receive, bewitch

laund, glade

lavolt, lavolta, high-leaping dance

lay, wager

lazar, leper, sick beggar

leading, command, direction, generalship

leaguer, camp

lean, depend

Leander, lover of Hero of Sestos, he swam the Hellespont nightly to visit her in her tower, and was drowned in a storm

learn, teach

leasing, lying

leather-coat, russet apple

lecture, lesson, instruction

leer, appearance, complexion

leese, lose

leet, court held by lord of the manor

leman, sweetheart, lover

lengthen, delay, postpone

lenity, gentleness

leno, pimp, pander

lenten, meagre

let, hindrance; to binder, forbear, cause

Lethe, river in Hades; to drink its waters gave forgetfulness

level, aim, line of fire, range; to aim, guess

liable, subject, suitable

liberal, accomplished, humane, abundant, free in speech, unrestrained, gross

lie, to lodge, stay, be still, in prison or in defensive posture

lief, dear

liege, sovereign lord

light, frivolous, unchaste, swift, easy, merry, trivial, delirious

like, please, be in good condition

liking, bodily condition

limbeck, distilling vessel

limber, flexible

lime, cement, catch with birdlime

limit, prescribed time, time of rest after childbearing, region; to appoint

limitation, allotted time

line, rank, Equator, cord for taking measurements; copulate with

linger, prolong, defer

link, torch, lamp-black

linsey-woolsey, woven material of wool and flax, hence medley, nonsense

linstock, forked stick holding a gunner’s match

list, limit, bound, barriers enclosing tilting ground, desire; to please, choose

lither, yielding

livelihood, liveliness, animation

liver, supposedly the seat of love and strong emotion

lob, bumpkin

lockram, linen cloth

lodge, flatten, beat down

loggats, game of aiming small logs at a fixed stake

long, belong

loose, unattached, negligent; moment of arrow a discharge, last moment

lose, to ruin, forget

lover, friend, mistress

luce, pike as heraldic device

luggage, baggage of an army

lune, fit of temper, of frenzy

lurch, lurk, rob

lure, dummy bird for recalling hawk

lust, pleasure, desire

lustihood, vigour

lusty, merry, lustful, insolent, boisterous

luxurious, lustful, lecherous

luxury, lust

lyam, leash





maculate, stained, impure

maculation, stain, impurity

mainly, with force, greatly, perfectly

majority, pre-eminence

make, mate, husband or wife

making, form, appearance

malapert, saucy

malkin, servant wench, slut

mammer, hesitate

mammock, tear to bits

manège, art of horsemanship

mandrake, poisonous plant believed to shriek when pulled up

mankind, resembling a man, violent, ferocious

manner, stolen goods found on a thief

mansionry, dwelling-place

map, picture, embodiment

mappery, map-making

marches, border country next to Scotland or Wales

marry, (as an exclamation) by (the Virgin) Mary

Mars, god of war and patron of soldiers

mate, rival, checkmate, destroy, stupefy

material, important, forming the substance, full of sense

maugre, in spite of

maund, basket

mazzard, head

maw, gullet, stomach

meacock, coward, weakling

meal, spot, stain

mean, something between or intervening, middle, medium position, tenor, alto; to lament; humble, moderate

measurable, suitable

measure, a stately dance; tune; to measure

mechanic, labourer; practical, manual

mechanical, mean, vulgar; labourer

Medea, escaping with Jason she tore to pieces her brother Absyrtus, scattering his limbs in her father’s path to delay him; restored the youth of Jason’s father, Aeson

medicinable, healing, medicinal

medlar, fruit eaten soft and pulpy; prostitute

meed, reward, gift, merit

meiny, company of retainers, multitude

mell, to meddle

memorize, make memorable

memory, memorial, memento, remembrance

Mercury, messenger of the gods

mere, sure, absolute, unqualified, only

merely, simply, entirely

merit, reward

mess, dish, portion, group originally of four persons eating together, set of four

metaphysical, supernatural

mete, measure, aim

metheglin, spiced mead

methinks, it seems to me

method, table of contents

micher, truant

mickle, great

microcosm, little world, man considered as epitome of the universe

milch, in milk, tearful

mince, to extenuate, moderate, affect

mineral, mine

Minerva, goddess of wisdom

minimus, creature of tiniest size

minion, favourite, darling, harlot, saucy creature

Minotaur, devouring monster dwelling in labyrinth of Crete

mirable, wonderful

mirror, model, pattern

mischief, misfortune, injury, disease

misdread, fear of evil

miser, miserable wretch

misgoverned, unruly

misgovernment, misconduct

misgrafted, badly matched

misprision, contempt, mistake, misunderstanding

misproud, arrogant

missive, messenger

mistake, take, undertake or deliver wrongly, misjudge, blunder, feel misgiving about

misthink, think evil of

mistress, the jack at bowls

mobled, muffled

mockery, imitation, futile action

model, architect’s plan, mould, copy

modern, everyday, commonplace

modest, moderate, satisfactory, becoming

modestly, without exaggeration

modesty, moderation, avoidance of exaggeration

moiety, half, share, small part

moldwarp, mole

mome, blockhead

moment, cause

monster, make a monster of, show as monstrous

monument, sepulchre, effigy, portent

monumental, memorial, commemorating

mood, anger, outward appearance, mode

mooncalf, misshapen creature

moonish, changeable

mop, grimace

mope, move blindly and stupidly, be bewildered

moral, morally fabled

moralize, interpret, explain

mort, note on a horn at the death of the deer

mortified, dead to the world, deadened, destroyed

morifying, mortal

mose in the chine, suffer from glanders (a horse disease)

mot, motto

mother, hysteria

motion, motive, puppet show, puppet; to propose

motive, cause, instigator, instrument, moving limb or organ

mould, earth

mountainish, barbarous

mouse, tear, bite

mouse-hunt, woman-chaser

mow, grimace

mulled, thick, heavy

mummy, dead flesh, medicinal or magical preparation from this

muniments, furnishings

mure, wall

murrain, plague

muse, wonder

muset, gap

muss, scramble

mutine, mutineer; rebel

mutinies, riots, civil disturbances

mutiny, strife, quarrel

mutual, common, intimate

mutually, in return, together

mystery, trade, profession, skill





nails, by God’s nails

naked, unarmed, plain

Naso, family name of the poet Ovid

native, source, origin; natural, kindred, closely related, rightful

natural, that is so by birth, related by blood, kind, tender; half-wit

naturalize, familiarize

naught, wickedness, wicked, ruined, ruin

naughty, bad, wicked, good-for-nothing

nave, nub, navel

neaf, fist

neat, animal of the ox kind, cattle

neb, mouth

Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, driven out to eat grass like cattle

needsly, necessarily

neglect, cause of neglect

nephew, cousin, grandson

Neptune, god of the sea

Nereides, sea-nymphs

Nero, Roman emperor, responsible for the assassination of his mother; believed to have played on the lyre and recited while watching the burning of the city set on fire by his orders

nerve, sinew

nervy, sinewy

Nessus, centaur killed by Hercules for trying to rape Deianira; a tunic dyed with his blood poisoned Hercules

Nestor, oldest and wisest of the Greeks at the siege of Troy

netherland, underworld, lower world

new-cut, a card game

next, nearest, quickest

nice, wanton, delicate, shy, difficult to please, fastidious, scrupulous, subtle, needing precision, delicately balanced, intricate, exact, skilful, trivial

nicely, elegantly, scrupulously, sophistically, exactly

niceness, coyness, fastidiousness

nicety, coyness

Nicholas, patron saint of scholars; Saint Nicholas’ clerks, highwaymen

nickname, name wrongly

niggard, to act in a miserly way, supply sparingly

night-gown, dressing gown

night-rule, disorder by night

nine-men’s morris, cutting in turf for game played with nine pegs or discs

Niobe, overboastful of her children, who were slain; she was herself turned to stone

nittical, nit-infested

noise, rumour, strife, music, band of musicians; clamour, spread by rumour

noll, head

nonsuit, to refuse to listen to or grant the suit of

nook-shotten, having a very uneven outline

notch, cut with notches, slash

notedly, precisely

nothing, vulva

notion, understanding, mind

nourish, bring up, nurture

novum, dice-game in which chief throws are nine and five

noyance, injury, harm

nuncio, messenger

nursery, nursing, care

nut-hook, beadle, constable





oathable, fit to take an oath

ob., abbreviation of ‘obolus’, halfpenny

objection, charge, accusation

obligation, contract

obliged, pledged

obsequious, dutiful, dutiful in funeral rites

observant, obsequious servant

observe, humour

occasion, opportunity, pretext, cause, course of events

occulted, hidden

occupation, business, handicraft, trade

occupy, have to do with sexually

occurrent, event

oddly, unevenly

oeillade, inviting glance, ogling

o’erblow, blow away

o’ercount, outnumber

o’ercrow, triumph over

o’erdyed, dyed with a second colour

o’ereaten, left after most has been eaten

o’erflourished, decorated on the outside

o’erlook, examine, bewitch, despise

o’ermaster, possess

o’erparted, having too difficult a part

o’er-peer, rise above

o’erpost, get over easily

o’er-raught, overtook

o’er-teemed, worn out by child-bearing

o’er-watch, stay awake too long

o’erwhelm, overhang

o’erwrested, strained

offend, harm, hurt

offer, act on the offensive, venture

office, function, service

offices, parts of a house devoted to household matters

omit, neglect, disregard, lay aside

omittance, postponement

open-arse, medlar (fruit)

operant, effecting, effective

operation, effect, efficacy

opinion, censure, public judgement, self-conceit, self-confidence

opposeless, irresistible

opposite, antagonist, opponent; hostile, adverse

oppress, suppress, distress

oppression, burden, distress

oppugnancy, conflict

orb, circle, sphere, sphere in which a star moves, heavenly body, earth

ordinance, what is ordained, established rule, decree, rank

ordinary, fixed-price tavern meal, ‘ordinary run’

orgulous, proud

orifex, aperture

orison, prayer

ort, fragment, scrap

ostent, appearance, show

ostentation, appearance, show, spectacle

othergates, in another way

otherwhiles, at times

ouch, jewel

ounce, lynx

ouph, elf

ousel, blackbird

outbrave, to surpass in beauty or valour

outlandish, foreign

outlive, survive

outpeer, surpass

outrageous, violent, volatile

outsell, exceed in value

outside, outer garment

outward, outward appearance

overdrip, drip over, overshadow

overhear, hear over again

overhold, overestimate

overlook, overtop, look down on from above, read through

overpeer, rise above, look down on

overscutched, made haggard with beating, worn out

overture, disclosure; formal opening, first indication

Ovid, Roman poet who was sent into exile

owe, own, possess





pace, train (a horse) to pace

pack, gang; conspire, shuffle (cards), to cheat, be off

packing, plotting

paddock, toad

pageant, show, spectacle

pain, trouble, punishment

painful, laborious, toilsome

pale, fence, enclosure; enclose, encircle

palisado, staked fence

pall, fail

palliament, white robe of a candidate for the Roman consulship

palmer, pilgrim

palsy, tremors

palter, equivocate, use trickery

pander, go-between in a love affair, pimp

Pandion, see PHILOMEL

pantaloon, foolish old man

pantler, servant in charge of the pantry

paper, notice specifying offence committed; write down

paragon, compare, excel, show as a model

Parca, one of the three fates who prepared and cut the thread of human life

parcel, part, item, group

parcel-gilt, partly gilded

pard, panther or leopard

pardie, certainly, indeed

Paris ball, tennis ball

paritor, official who summoned offenders to an ecclesiastical court

parlous, perilous, cunning, dreadful, shrewd, clever

part, action, side

partage, freight, cargo

partake, impart, take sides

partaker, confederate, supporter

parted, divided, gifted

partialize, make partial

particular, detail, individual, personal interest, intimacy; private, personal

partisan, footsoldier’s weapon, a long-handled spear with a blade

parts, qualities, accomplishments

pash, head; to strike violently, smash

passado, a forward thrust in fencing

passant, heraldic term of beast stepping; surpassing

passenger, traveller on foot

passing, excessively

passion, suffering, affliction, fit of disease, overpowering emotion, passionate speech, sorrow; feel deep emotion

passionate, express with passion; compassionate, sorrowful

patch, fool

patchery, trickery

paten, thin circular metal plate

patent, title, privilege, authority

patience, permission, leave

patronage, uphold, defend

pattern, precedent, model; to give an example, be a pattern or precedent for

pax, tablet kissed by priest and congregation in celebration of mass

peach, denounce, turn informer

peat, spoilt girl

peck, pitch

peculiar, individual, private, belonging to one person

pedant, schoolmaster

peeled, tonsured

Pegasus, winged horse

peise, balance, weight, suspend

pelf, property, possessions

pelican, believed to feed its young with its own blood

pelt, rage, scold

pelting, paltry, worthless

pencil, paintbrush

pendulous, impending, suspended

pensioners, royal bodyguard

Penthesilea, Amazon queen

peradventure, by chance, perhaps

perdition, ruin, loss, damnation

perdurable, everlasting

peregrinate, travelled, foreign in style

perfect, fully informed, equipped, ready; accomplish, instruct

perfection, performance, completion

periapt, amulet

period, end, goal, highest point, full pause, full stop; to end

perjure, perjurer; corrupt

perniciously, to destruction

perpend, consider

persistive, steadfast

perspective, optical device for producing fantastic images; picture of figure producing a distorted or unexpected effect

pert, lively

pervert, turn aside

pester, throng, obstruct

pestiferous, pernicious

phantasim, fantastic being

Philomel, Philomela, daughter of Pandion, raped by Tereus (husband of her sister Progne), who cut out her tongue; she wove her story into a tapestry. Progne feasted Tereus on their murdered son; Philomela was changed into a nightingale.

Phoebe, Diana, goddess of the moon

Phoebus, Apollo, god of the sun

phoenix, unique Arabian bird which, dying, is recreated from its own ashes

phraseless, inexpressible

phthisic, consumptive cough

physic dose with medicine

physical, beneficial to health

pia mater, brain

picked, refined, fastidious

Pickt-hatch, London district noted for brothels

pie, magpie

piece, cask of liquor, masterpiece; add to, augment

pied, parti-coloured

pike, spike in centre of buckler

pill, plunder, rob, strip (of bark), make bald

pillicock, penis

pin and web, disease of the eye

pinch, bite, pang; to bite, harass, distress

pismire, ant

pitch, high point of a falcon’s flight

place position, office

placket, petticoat, opening, slit

planched, made of boards

plant, sole of the foot

plantage, plants

plash, pool

plausible, pleasing

plausibly, with applause

plausive, deserving of applause

Plautus, Roman writer of comedy

pleached, formed by intertwined overarched boughs, folded

pleasant, merry, jokey

pleurisy, abundance, excess

plight, pledge

Pluto, ruler of the underworld

Plutus, god of riches

poach, to thrust, stab

point, highest point, conclusion, lace with tags (for attaching hose to doublet, etc.), full stop

poking-stick, rod used for pleating ruffs

polecat, prostitute

policy, government, administration, prudence in managing public or private affairs, cunning, craftiness, trick

politic, dealing with government and administration, crafty

politician, schemer, scheming statesman

pomewater, large juicy kind of apple

pomp, procession, pageant

Pontic sea, Black Sea

poop, swamp, overwhelm

poor-john, salted fish

popular, plebeian, vulgar

popularity, common pledge

porridge, porrage, soup

porringer, basin

port, gate, bearing, style of living

portable, bearable, endurable

portage, portholes

portance, behaviour

posied, inscribed with a motto

possess, inform, acquaint

posset, drink of hot milk curdled with ale or wine; curdle, thicken

post, post set up for notices, etc., doorpost on which tavern reckoning was kept, courier, messenger, post-horse; to hasten, carry swiftly

poster, swift traveller

posy, motto inscribed inside a ring

potable, able to be drunk

potato, sweet potato, supposedly aphrodisiac

potency, power, authority

potent, potentate

potential, powerful

potting, tippling

pouncet-box, small box for perfumes

powder, preserve meat with salt or spice

powdering-tub, pickling-tub, sweating-tub used in cure of venereal disease

power, army

pox, syphilis, venereal disease

practice, trickery, conspiracy, plot

practisant, one who carries out a trick

practise, plot, conspire

praemunire, writ for maintaining papal jurisdiction in England

praetor, Roman magistrate

praise, appraise, value

prank, adorn

prate, chatter, prattle

precedent, former; original from which a copy is made, sign

precisian, puritan

precurrer, forerunner

precurse, heralding

predicament, situation

prefer, present, advance, introduce, recommend

preferment, advancement, promotion

pregnancy, quickness of wit

pregnant, clear, fertile, compelling, resourceful, receptive

prejudicate, influence beforehand

prejudice, injury; injure

premise, aforesaid matter

premised, sent before

preparation, accomplishment

preposterous, inverting the natural order of things, monstrous

prerogative, precedence, pre-eminence, prior place

presage, omen, prognostication, foreboding

presence, presence-chamber, company, person

present, immediate, instant; ready money, to show, represent, bring a charge against

presently, immediately

presentment, dedication

press, crowd, crowding, printing-press, cupboard, authority to enlist men compulsorily; to crowd, oppress, force into military service

pressure, impression, character impressed

pretence, expressed aim, intention, pretext

prevent, anticipate, escape, avoid

prick, mark made by pricking, dot, point, spot in centre of target, prickle, penis; to mark by making a dot, etc., pierce, fix, point, spur

pricket, buck in its second year

prick-song, music sung from notes

pride, magnificence, splendid adornment, highest state, mettle, sexual desire

prig, thief

prime, first, chief, sexually excited; springtime

primogenitive, first-born’s right to inherit

principal, superior, abettor, principal rafter

princox, pert youth

Priscian, Roman grammarian

prithee, please

private, private person

privates, sexual organs

prize, contest; to value, esteem

prizer, prize-fighter, wrestler

probal, to, able to bear the probe or examination of

probation, trial, proof

proceeder, one proceeding to a university degree

procurator, proxy

prodigious, ominous, portentous, monstrous, abnormal

proditor, traitor

proface, ‘may it do you good’, formula of welcome before a meal

profited, proficient

progeny, lineage, race

progress, royal journey in state

project, notion, idea; set forth, exhibit

projection, plan

prolixious, prolonged

prolong, postpone

Prometheus, stole fire from heaven and was chained to Mount Caucasus

prone, ready, eager

proof, test, trial, experience, issue, result

propend, incline

proper, (one’s) own, private, peculiar, excellent, handsome

property, identity, particular quality, take possession of, endow with qualities, make a tool of

proportion, portion, division, relative size, proportioning, rhythm

propose, put forward, set before one’s mind, suppose, converse

propriety, identity, proper state

propugnation, defence

prorogue, prolong, postpone

prosecution, pursuit

Proserpina, daughter of Ceres, carried away by Pluto to become queen of hell

prosperous, favourable

Proteus, a sea-god, able to assume different shapes

protractive, consisting in delay

proud, elated, giving cause for pride, lofty, splendid, spirited, swollen, over-luxuriant, sexually excited

prove, try, test, find by experience, experience

publish, make known, proclaim, denounce

pucelle, virgin, maid, slut

puck, pixy, mischievous spirit

pudding, sausage, stuffing

pudency, modesty

puissance, strength, armed force

puissant, strong, powerful

pumpion, pumpkin

punk, prostitute, harlot

punto reverso, back-handed thrust in fencing

puny, novice, person of small account

purblind, quite blind, partially blind

purchase, booty, prize, annual rent from land; to strive, gain, acquire otherwise than by inheritance

purgation, clearing from accusation or suspicion

purlieu, tract of land bordering on a forest

purpose, proposal, conversation

pursuivant, junior attendant on heralds, herald, messenger

pursy, short-winded, fat

purveyor, steward going ahead to make provision

putter on, instigator

puttock, bird of prey, kite, buzzard





quail, prostitute; to fail, faint, overpower

quaint, skilful, clever, dainty, line, beautiful, elaborate

qualification, calm and controlled condition

qualify, moderate, mitigate, appease, control, dilute

quality, accomplishment, rank, profession, party, side, manner, cause

quarry, heap of slaughtered game

quarter, part, watch, relations with and conduct towards another

quat, pimple

quatch, word of unknown meaning

quean, hussy, whore

queasy, hazardous, squeamish

quell, slaughter

quest, jury, inquest, search party

questant, seeker

questionable, inviting question

questrist, seeker

quick, flowing, fresh, impatient, living

quiddity, subtlety, equivocation

quietus, clearing of accounts

quintain, object or figure to practise tilting at

quirk, quibble, clever expression, peculiarity of behaviour, fit, start

quit, set free, rid, acquit, acquit oneself of, revenge, repay, requite

quittal, requital

quittance, discharge from debt, requital; requite

quoif, close-fitting cap

quondam, former

quote, give marginal references to, set down in writing, note, observe, regard

quoth, said

quotidian, (of an intermittent fever) returning every day





race, root (of ginger), lineage, breed, natural disposition

rack, driving cloud; to torture, extend, stretch, strain

rage, madness, angry disposition, sexual passion; to enrage

‘raigning arraigning, putting on trial

ramp, loose woman

rampallian, riotous woman

rampire, barricade

rank, growing too luxuriantly, swollen, grown too fat, rebellious, high, full, lustful, in heat, coarse, festering; closely

rankle, cause a festering wound

rankness, overflowing, insolence

rare, splendid

rascal, inferior deer

rate, estimate, value, expense

ravel, become entangled, disentangle

raven, devour greedily

rayed, bespattered, fouled

read, teach, discover the meaning of, expound a riddle

re-answer, compensate for

reason, speech, remark; to talk, discuss, explain

reasonable, needing the use of reason

reave, deprive, take away

rebate, make dull, blunt

rebato, stiff collar

receipt, what is received, receptacle, receiving, capacity, recipe

receiving, understanding, reception

recheat, notes sounded on a horn to call hounds together in stag-hunting

reck, to care (for), mind

reclaim, tame, subdue

recognizance, bond, token

recomfort, console, restore

record, witness, memory; to witness, sing

recordation, memorial, impression on the memory

recourse, access, admission, flowing

recover, reconcile, reach, rescue

recovery, process by which entailed estate was transferred from one party to another

rector, ruler, head

rectorship, rule

recure, restore, heal

reduce, bring, bring back

reechy, smoky, dirty, stinking

reek, smoke, steam

refel, refute

reflect, shine

regiment, authority, rule

region, upper air, air

regreet, greeting, contract

reguerdon, reward

rehearsal, account

rehearse, describe, tell

reins, kidneys

rejoindure, reunion

rejourn, adjourn

relative, able to be related and believed

religion, strict fidelity, religious duty

religious, exact, conscientious, strict

remember, mention, commemorate, remind

remit, pardon, give up

remonstrance, demonstration

remorse, pity, tenderness, moderation, qualification, mitigation

remorseful, compassionate

remotion, departing

removed, remote, secluded, separated by time or space

removedness, absence

remover, one who changes

render, surrender, rendering of an account, statement; to give back, represent, describe as being, declare, state, surrender

rendezvous, refuge, last resort

renege, deny, renounce

renown, make famous

repair, restoring, coming; go, come, return

repairing, able to renew the attack

repasture, food

repeal, recall from exile; recall as from banishment, call back into favour

repetition, recital, mention

repine, vexation

replenished, perfect

replication, reply, echo

reprisal, prize

reprobance, damnation, rejection by God

reprobate, depraved

reproof, disgrace, disproof, refutation

reprove, disprove, refute

repugn, oppose

repugnancy, resistance

repugnant, refractory

rescue, freeing from legal custody by force

resemblance, appearance, likelihood

resist, affect with distaste

resolve, dissolve, answer (a question), solve (a problem), convince, inform

resolvedly, answering all questions

respect, relationship, discrimination, consideration, esteem; to regard, care for, esteem

respective, careful, worthy of being cared for, discriminating

respectively, respectfully

respite, delay, date to which something is postponed, limit

responsive, suited

rest, place to rest, restored strength, resolution, stakes kept in reserve

restrain, draw tight, withhold

resty, restive, sluggish

retention, detention, reserve, power to hold or retain

retentive, confining, restraining

retire, return

retort, to reflect (heat), reject (an appeal)

retreat, recall of pursuing force

retrograde, contrary, seeming to move in a backward course

reverb, resound

revolt, revulsion, change; rebel

revolution, alteration, change produced by time

revolve, consider

rhapsody, confused medley

rheum, mucus from nose or throat, cold in the head, rheumatism

riggish, wanton

rigol, ring, circle

rim, belly, membrane lining the abdomen

ring-carrier, go-between

ringlet, little circle

riot, loose living, debauchery

rivage, shore

rival, partner

rive, split

rivelled, wrinkled

road, riding, period of riding, stage (of journey), roadstead, highway

robustious, boisterous

roguing, roaming

roguish, vagrant

roisting, blustering, bullying

roll, household register

rondure, circle

ropery, knavery

Roscius, famous Roman actor

rote, fix by memory

round, plain, plain-spoken, severe; round dance, roundabout way, rung of a ladder; surround, become round

roundet, round dance

rouse, full draught of liquor, drinking bout

royal, gold coin of the value often shillings (fifty pence)

royalty, prerogative enjoyed, or granted, by the sovereign

roynish, scurvy

rub, in bowls an obstacle hindering or turning aside the bowl, obstacle, hindrance, roughness, unevenness; to turn aside, hinder

rubious, ruby-red

ruddock, robin

rude, ignorant, barbarous, violent, rough

rudeness, violence, roughness

rudesby, rough unmannerly brute

ruffle, bustle; swagger, bear oneself proudly, bluster, be turbulent

rugged, shaggy, frowning

rug-headed, having shaggy hair

ruinous, brought to ruin

rumour, fame, tumult, uproar

runagate, deserter, vagabond

runnion, wretch (a term of abuse)

russet, homely, simple





sable, black

sack, white wine

sackbut, trumpet resembling a trombone

sad, steadfast, grave, serious, dismal

sadly, gravely, seriously

sadness, seriousness

safe, make safe

safety, custody, safeguard

sain, said

salamander, lizard-like animal supposed to live in fire

sale-work, ready-made goods not of the highest quality

sallet, light helmet, something mixed or savoury

salt, lecherous

salute, touch, affect

sample, example

sanctimony, holiness, sanctity

sanctuarize, give sanctuary to

sand-blind, half-blind

sanguine, red

sans, without

sapient, wise

sarcenct, fine soft silk material

sauce, over-charge, rebuke

saucy, insolent, presumptuous, wanton

savagery, wild growth

savour, smell, perfume, style, character

saw, saying, maxim, proverb

say, finely woven cloth, taste, saying

scab, rascal, scurvy fellow

scald, scabby, mean

scale, weigh

scan, assess

scandalize, disgrace

scantling, specimen, sample

scantly, slightingly

scape, escapade, transgression; escape

scarf, officer’s sash, sling, streamer; blindfold, deck with streamers

scathe, harm; to injure

schedule, document

school, university, instruction, learning; reprimand, discipline

science, knowledge

scion, shoot, slip for grafting

sconce, head, small fort or earthwork

scope, object, aim, purpose, theme, liberty

score, notch cut in stock or tally in keeping accounts, account; to notch

scorn, taunt, insult, object of contempt

scotch, cut, gash

scour, hasten

scrimer, fencer

scrip, small bag, piece of paper with writing on

scrippage, contents of scrip

scripture, writing

scrubbed, stunted

scruple, tiny part, doubt, difficulty

scurril, coarsely abusive

scut, deer’s tail

scutcheon, shield with coat of arms; tablet showing armorial bearings of a dead man

seam, fat, grease

sectary, dissenter, one who pursues a particular study

secure, free from care, confident, unsuspicious; make confident or overconfident

securely, confidently, without suspicion

security, confidence, overconfidence

seed, mature, run to seed

seedness, sowing

seeing, appearance

seel, make blind, close (a person’s eyes)

seely, foolish, innocent, harmless

seen, skilled

seld, seldom

self, one’s own, same

semblable, similar, like, equal

semblative, like, resembling

Seneca, Roman tragic dramatist

sennight, week

sense, physical feeling, sensuality, sexual desire, mental apprehension, mind, opinion

senseless, without feeling or perception, free from sensual sin

sensible, perceptible, tangible, substantial, having sensation, sensitive, endowed with feeling

sensibly, having sensation, feelingly

sentence, sententious saying, maxim

septentrion, north

sequel, series

sequent, succeeding, following

sequester, separation; to separate

sequestration, separation, seclusion

sere, dry, withered

serpigo, a skin disease

servanted, subject

service, what is placed on the table for a meal

setter, decoy

several, distinct, different, individual, respective, various

severally, separately, at different entrances or exits

sewer, attendant in charge of service at a meal

shadow, shade; to hide, shelter

shame, to be ashamed

shard, piece of broken pottery, patch of cow-dung

shark, gather hastily together

shaver, barber, extortioner

shearman, one who shears woollen cloth

sheaved, made of straw

sheep-biter, sneaking rascal

sheep-biting, sneaking

shent, blamed, rebuked, reproved

shift, expedient, resource, trick, set of clothes; for (a) shift, to serve a turn; make (a) shift, contrive, manage

ship-tire, kind of head-dress

shive, slice

shoat, shallow, sand-bar

shock, to meet with force

shog, go, shift

shoot, shooting movement

shotten, that has spawned, lean

shoulder-shotten, having a dislocated shoulder

shove-groat, shovel-board

shrewd, wicked, mischievous, bad-tempered, dangerous, evil, difficult

shrewdly, sharply, grievously, intensely, very much

shrieve, sheriff

shrift, confession and absolution, penance

shrill-gorged, shrill-throated

shrive, to hear confession and absolve

shroud, protection, sailropes; shelter, hide

shuffle, use trickery, smuggle, shift

siege, seat, rank, turd

sight, visor

sightless, unseen, unsightly

silly, helpless, defenceless

simple, medicinal herb, single ingredient in a compound

simpleness, innocence, simplicity, foolishness

simplicity, ignorance, silliness

simular, pretended, plausible; counterfeiter

sinfully, with sins unatoned for

single, slight, trivial, sincere, simple

singularity, eccentricity, own person

sinister, left (hand), unfavourable, unjust

sink, cause to fall, ruin; sewer, drain

Sinon, a Greek who by guile persuaded the Trojans to take the Grecians’ wooden horse into Troy

sirrah, form of address used mainly to inferiors

sith, sithence, since

size, allowance

skill, judgement, reason, ability; to make a difference, matter

skilless, ignorant

skimble-skamble, confused, rubbishy

skipper, flighty youth

skirr, fly, scour

slab, half-solid

slander, ill-repute, disgrace, discredit; bring into disgrace, reproach

slanderous, shameful, disgraceful

slave, enslave, make subservient to oneself

sleave, floss-silk, silk untwisted into line threads

sleeve-hand, cuff

sleided, (of silk) floss, untwisted into line threads

sliding, slip

slip, unleash

slipper, shifty

slippery, unstable, fickle

slipshod, in slippers

slobbery, sloppy, slovenly

slops, wide breeches

slovenly, nasty, disgusting

slubber, sully, hurry over

smatch, taste

smatter, chatter

smock, woman’s undergarment, woman

smooth, flatter, gloss over

smother suffocating smoke

smug, trim, spruce

sneap, snub, pinch with cold

snuff, resentment

sob, opportunity for a horse to recover his wind, respite

sod, steeped, boiled

soiled, fed with fresh-cut green fodder

soilure, sullying, defilement

sole, unique, mere, alone

solely, alone, entirely

solemnity, ceremony, festivity

solicit, urging, entreaty; move, stir, bring something about

sometime, at some time, sometimes, once, formerly

sonance, sounding, signal

sonties, saints

sooth, truth, flattery

soothe, humour, flatter

soother, flatterer

sop, bread or wafer dipped in wine, etc.

sophister, one using false arguments

sore, buck, deer, in its fourth year

sorel, buck, deer, in its third year

sort, lot, rank, company, group, way, state; allot, ordain, come about, turn out, be suitable, correspond, adapt, fit, classify, choose, contrive, go in company

sortance, agreement, suitableness

sound, utter, proclaim, keep sound

souse, swoop on, pickle

span-counter, game in which counters are thrown to lie within a hand’s span

spavin, disease of horses consisting of swelling of joints, producing lameness

specialty, special characteristic, possession, special contract under seal

spectacles, organs of sight

speculation, watcher, power of seeing, sight, looking on

speculative, seeing

speed, fortune, outcome, protection, assistance; to fare (well or ill), turn out, be successful, assist, favour

speeding, successful, fruitful; lot, outcome, success

spend, consume, exhaust

sphere, orbit of a planet, one of the concentric globes supposed to revolve round the earth with a harmonious sound

spherical, planetary

spial, spy

spigot, peg in faucet of a barrel

spill, destroy

spilth, spilling

spin, spurt

spinner, spider

spinster, spinner

spital, hospital

spleen, bodily organ regarded as the seat of emotions; impetuosity, ill-humour

spoil, plundering, prey, ruin; plunder, seize, destroy

spot, stain, disgrace, embroidered pattern

spring, fountain, source, shoot of a plant

springe, snare for birds

springhalt, disease of horse characterized by twitching and lameness

spurn, kick, insult, blow; to kick, oppose scornfully

square, fair, just; carpenter’s set-square, measure, rule; body of troops in square formation, square of material in bosom of a dress; to regulate, quarrel (among), be at variance

squarer, quarreller

squash, unripe peapod

squiny, look asquint

staff, shaft of lance, lance, stanza

stagger, hesitate, waver

staggers, giddiness

stain, tinge, to eclipse, dim, be obscured

stair, ladder

stair-work, furtive love-making

stale, decoy, bait, prostitute, laughing-stock, urine (of horses)

stall, install, keep, dwell, bring (a hunted animal) to a stand

stamp, stamping tool, coin, medal, distinguishing mark, imprint; to impress, mark with an impression, give approval to

stanch, satisfy

stanchless, insatiable

stand, place where one stands in ambush or in hiding; confront, oppose, stand firm; stand at a guard with, be fully protected against; stand on, upon, insist on, persist in, depend on, rely on, concern, be the duty or interest of; stand to, have an erection, support, maintain, be firm in, persist in; stand to it, maintain a cause, take a stand

standard, standard-bearer

staniel, kestrel

stare, (of hair) stand on end

start, sudden invasion, sudden flight, impulse; to startle, rush

starting-hole, refuge, loop-hole

starve, die, die of cold, kill or benumb with cold

state, condition, condition of health or prosperity, rank, dignity, chair of state, throne, nobles, ruling body, government

station, way of standing, attitude

statist, statesman

statute, bond, mortgage

statute-cap, woollen cap ordered in 1571 to be worn on Sundays and holy days by all below a certain rank

stay, obstacle; detain, stand, stand firm, wait (for), attend on

stead, to be of use to, help

stell, to fix, portray

stern, rudder

stew, brothel, stewpan

stick, stab, be fastened or fixed, hesitate

stickler-like, like an umpire

stigmatic, deformed person

stigmatical, deformed

still, always, continually

stillitory, apparatus for distillation

stilly, softly

sting, sexual desire

stint, stop

stithy, forge

stoccado, thrust with a rapier

stock, block of wood, person without feeling, stocking, dowry; set in the stocks

stockfish, dried cod or other fish, beaten before cooking

stockish, blockish, unfeeling

stomach, appetite, inclination, temper, courage, pride, anger; resent

stomacher, ornamental front over which the bodice was laced

stone, mirror, thunderbolt, testicle; turn to stone

stone-bow, cross-bow used for shooting stones

stoop, (of a bird of prey) swoop

stop, hole in a wind-instrument, stopped to produce a difference in pitch, fingering of musical chords, fret of a lute; staunch, heal

store, breeding, increase; to populate

stout, bold, strong, proud

stoutness, stubborn pride

stover, fodder for cattle

strain, race, character, kind, class, tune; clasp, force, constrain; urge

strait, narrow, tight-fitting, strict, niggardly; narrow place, difficulty

strange, foreign, new, not knowing, unfriendly, cold, shy

strange-achieved, gained at a distance and for others

strange-disposed, of unusual character

strangely, coldly, without greeting, as a stranger, to an extraordinary degree, in an unusual way

strangeness, behaving as a stranger, aloofness, reserve

strappado, torture in which victim was hoisted up by his arms, which were tied behind his back, then let down halfway with a jerk

stratagem, deed of violence

straw, wisp of straw, mark of disgrace for a scolding woman

stray, body of stragglers; lead astray

strength, authority, legal power, body of troops

strewment, strewing of flowers

stricture, strictness

strike, to lower (sail), blast, destroy, tap (a cask)

strong-house, fortified residence, castle

strossers, trousers

stubborn, inflexible, stiff, rude, harsh, ruthless

stuff, semen; cloth

style, title

subduement, conquest

subjection, duty as, or of, a subject

submission, confession of error

subscribe, sign, write down, assent, acknowledge, admit, submit, yield up, answer

subscribed, endorsed with signatures

subscription, submission

substantial, sturdy

substractor, slanderer

subtle, thin, fine, cunning, treacherous, tricky

subtlety, illusion

success, outcome, result, good or bad fortune, succession

successfully, likely to succeed

succession, following on, successors, success

successive, hereditary, descending by succession

successively, by inheritance

sufferance, suffering, damage, patient endurance

suffice, content, satisfy

sufficient, able, able to meet liabilities, solvent

suggest, tempt, prompt to evil, insinuate to

suggestion, prompting to evil, temptation

sumless, incalculable

summoner, officer who summoned offenders to an ecclesiastical court

sumpter, driver of pack-horse, pack-horse

superflux, superabundance, surplus

supernal, heavenly

superscript, superscription, address or direction on letter

superstitious, idolatrously devoted

supervise, perusal; look over

suppliance, pastime

supply, help, reinforcements

supposal, opinion

suppose, supposition, expectation; believe, imagine, guess

supposition, doubt

surcease, cessation; cease

sure, safe, beyond power of doing harm, reliable, united

surety, confidence of safety, certainty, stability, warrant

sur-reined, overridden

suspect, suspicion

suspire, breathe, draw breath

sutler, one who sells provisions to soldiers

swagger, rant, bluster, quarrel

swaggerer, blusterer, quarreller

swaggering, quarrelling

swart, dark, swarthy

swasher, blustering ruffian

swashing, swaggering, slashing

sway, direction, control, sovereignty; to rule, move

swayed, curved in

swear, swear out, forswear

sweat, sweating sickness, sweating cure; take a sweating cure

sweet, scented; scent

sweet-gorged, crammed full with sweet foods

sweeting, sweet variety of apple, term of endearment

swim, float

swinge, thrash

swinge-buckler, roisterer

sworder, cut-throat, gladiator

‘Swounds, by God’s wounds (a strong oath)

sympathize, to be similarly affected, agree (with), match





table, tablet for an inscription, writing-tablet, flat surface on which a picture is painted, quadrangular space between chief lines on palm of hand

table-book, notebook

tables, backgammon

tabor, small drum

tackled stair, rope ladder

tag, tag-rag, rabble

tailor, ? sex organ

take, strike, strike with disease or enchantment, catch, take effect, reckon, measure, write down, accept as true, catch fire, perceive, understand, esteem, take away, conclude; take head, deviate, run off its course; take in, capture; take me with you, speak so that I can understand you; take it on, assume authority; take on, rage, show great distress, pretend; take out, make a copy of; take up, lift, enlist, arrest, buy on credit, rebuke, reprimand, oppose, encounter, make up (a quarrel)

taking, blasting; state of great excitement or alarm, malignant influence

tale, numbering one after another, talk, story, falsehood

talent, measure for a large sum of money

tall, long, lofty, goodly, line, brave

tally, stick marked with notches for keeping accounts

’tame, broach (a cask)

tang, ring out

tardy, delay

targe, light shield

tarre, urge, incite

tarriance, delay, waiting

tarry, wait, await, remain, delay

B, tax, impose a task on, occupy, put a strain on, put to proof

tasking, challenge

tassel-gentle, tercel, male hawk

tawdry-lace, silk lace or ribbon for the neck

tax, accusation; blame, accuse, charge

taxation, claim, demand, slander

teem, conceive, bring forth, bear children, be fruitful

teen, affliction, grief, sorrow

tell, count

temper, disposition, temperament, mental balance, hardness and elasticity imparted to steel; to compound, mix, persuade

temperance, mildness of temperature, calmness, chastity

temperate, chaste, secular

temporary, secular

tempt, test, risk

tenant, vassal

tend, listen, watch over, attend on, wait (for)

tendance, attending to, service, people in attendance

tender, offer, thing offered, care; to exhibit, pay down, care for; sensitive, compassionate

tender-hafted, tender-hested, gently framed

tent, probe; to probe, cure (a wound), lodge

Tereus, see PHILOMEL

Termagant, violent character, supposedly god of the Mohammedans, in old miracle plays

termination, expression, term

termless, indescribable

tertian, fever returning every third day

tester, sixpenny piece

tetter, skin disease

text, capital letter

thane, Scottish title or rank, somewhat lower than earl

thankful, deserving thanks

theoric, theory

therefor, for that

Thetis, a sea-goddess, the sea

thews, bodily parts, strength

thick, rapid, dim

thills, shafts of a cart

thing, sexual organ

think, seem

thought, anxiety, sorrow

thrasonical, boastful

three-farthings, thin silver coin, having a profile of Queen Elizabeth with a rose behind the ear

three-nooked, three-cornered

threne, threnos, dirge

thrift, profit, gain, advantage

thriftless, profitless

thrum, thread left at end of a warp

thunder-stone, thunderbolt

tickle, unstable, precarious; please, provoke, vex, thrash, flatter

tick-tack, game in which pegs were put into holes; fornication

tide, time, course

tidy, plump

tight, sound, able

tilt, thrust, fight, encounter

timeless, untimely, premature

timely, early, in due season

tinct, colour, elixir of the alchemists

tire, equipment, dress, head-dress; attire, prey (on), feed greedily

tis, this (dialectal)

tisick, consumptive cough

Titan, god of the sun, the sun

titely, quickly, speedily, swiftly

tithe, tenth; to take the tenth part; tribute

tithing, district

tittle, dot

to, in addition to, against, appropriate to, in comparison with, in respect of, as to

tod, 28 1b. weight of wool; to yield this amount of wool

tofore, previously

toge, Roman toga

toil, net, snare; to cause to work hard, weary with work

token, spot of infection, plague-spot

toll, exact toll or tribute

tonight, last night

tool, weapon, penis

top, head, forelock, highest point; to surpass, copulate with

top-gallant, highest mast, summit

topless, supreme

tortive, twisted

toss, impale, toss on a pike

tottering, ragged

touch, touchstone, taint; sound, test, wound

touse, pull out of joint

trace, follow, pass (through)

tract, trace, track, course

trade, coming and going, path, habit, business

traded, practised

trade-fallen, out of work

traditional, bound by tradition

train, tail, troop, bait; draw, entice, lead astray

traject, ferry

trammel, bind with the corpse, entangle

transfix, remove

translate, change, transform

transpose, change

trash, check, hold in leash

traverse, march, move from side to side

treatise, tale, talk

treble-dated, living three times as long as man

tree, gallows

trench, cut

trencher, wooden plate

trencher-friend, parasite

trenchering, plates

trencher-knight, hanger-on

tribunal, dais

trick, custom, way, knack, touch (of a disease), toy; to adorn, blazon

tricking, adornment

trill, trickle

triple, third

triple-turned, three times faithless

tristful, sorrowful

triumph, public festivity, tournament, trump card

triumphant, triumphal, celebrating a triumph

triumphantly, in celebration

Trojan, good fellow

troll, sing

troll-my-dames, troll-madams, game resembling bagatelle

trophy, token of victory, memorial, monument

tropically, figuratively

trot, bawd

troth, truth, faith, word of honour

trow, believe, think, know

truepenny, honest fellow

trull, prostitute, wench

truncheon, staff carried as a symbol of office

try, test; purify, reline, prove

tub, sweating-tub used in the treatment of venereal disease

tuck, rapier

tucket, signal, flourish on a trumpet

tun-dish, funnel

turtle, turtle-dove, symbol of chaste and faithful love

tushes, tusks

twire, twinkle

type, distinguishing sign, stamp

tyrannically, vehemently

tyranny, violence, outrage

tyrant, usurper





umbrage, shadow

unaccommodated, unprovided

unacquainted, unfamiliar

unadvised, rash, without consideration or knowledge

unagreeable, unsuited

unaneled, not having received extreme unction

unapproved, unconfirmed by proof

unaptness, disinclination

unattainted, without infection, unprejudiced

unattempted, untempted

unavoided, inevitable

unbarbed, unarmed

unbated, unabated, not blunted (with a button)

unbent, with bow unbent, unprepared, unfrowning

unbid, unexpected

unbitted, unbridled

unbolted, unsifted, coarse

unbookish, unskilled, inexperienced

unbreathed, unpractised

uncase, strip, lay bare

uncharge, acquit of guilt

uncharged, unattacked

unchary, carelessly

unchecked, not contradicted

unclasp, reveal

unclew, undo, ruin

uncomprehensive, unplumbable

unconfirmed, uninstructed, ignorant

uncovered, open, bare-headed

uncrossed, not crossed through because bill still unpaid

unction, salve, ointment

uncurrent, not current, not permissible

undercrest, wear as a device of honour

undergo, undertake, come under, support, carry, bear

underhand, unobtrusive

underskinker, under-tapster, assistant barman

undertake, take charge of, assume, have to do with, venture

undertaker, one who takes on himself another’s quarrel, one who settles with

underwrite, subscribe, submit to

uneath, with difficulty, scarcely

unexperient, inexperienced

unexpressive, inexpressible

unfair, rob of beauty

unfashionable, badly formed

unfenced, defenceless

unfold, disclose, display, reveal, release from the fold

unfurnished, unprovided, unprepared

ungalled, uninjured

ungenitured, impotent

ungored, unwounded

unhandsome, unskilled, nasty

unhappily, unfavourably, evilly

unhappiness, evil nature

unhappy, ill-fated, wretched, mischievous

unhouseled, not having received the sacrament

union, pearl

unkind, unnatural

unluckily, with foreboding

unmanned, not trained, not broken in

unowed, having no owner

unpaved, without testicles, castrated

unphysicked, deprived of medical treatment

unpitied, unmerciful

unplausive, unapproving

unpregnant, unapt

unprevailing, unavailing

unprizable, without value, invaluable

unprized, not valued, beyond value

unproper, not belonging to one person, indecent

unprovide, make unprepared

unquestionable, not inviting conversation

unraked, not covered with fuel to keep it burning

unrecalling, past recall

unreclaimed, unturned

unrecuring, past cure

unrespective, heedless, held back by no consideration, undiscriminating

unrolled, struck off the register

unscanned, unconsidered

unseasoned, ill-timed, inexperienced

unseminared, without seed

unsifted, untried

unsorted, ill-chosen

unspeakable, indescribable, inexpressible

unspeaking, unable to speak

unsquared, inappropriate

unstanched, unquenchable, freely menstruating

unstate, deprive of rank and state

untainted, unaccused

untempering, unwinning

untented, unable to be treated, incurable

untoward, perverse, unruly

untowardly, unluckily

untraded, not customary

untrimmed, undressed

untrussing, undoing hose, undressing

unwarily, unexpectedly

unweighed, hasty, unconsidered

unwrung, not pinched or rubbed

up, in arms, in rebellion, in prison; up and down, completely, exactly

upon, because of, in consequence of

urchin, hedgehog, goblin

urinal, glass to hold urine, medical urine vessel

usance, interest on money

use, habit, custom, usual experience, advantage, profit, lending at interest, interest on something lent, need; to be accustomed, continue, make a practice of, deal with, treat, go often

usher, assistant master

usurp, take or hold what belongs to another, supplant, assume

utterance, utmost extremity

uttermost, latest





vail, gratuity, tip, setting (of the sun); lower, let fall, do homage

vain, foolish, silly, unreal

valanced, fringed with hair

validity, strength, value

value, estimate, be worth

valued, denoting the value

vantage, advantage, gain, superiority, vantage-ground, opportunity

varletry, rabble

vastidity, immensity

vaulty, arched, hollow

vaunt, beginning

vaunt-courier, herald, harbinger

vengeance, harm, injury

vent, emission, utterance, outlet for energy; let out, emit, utter, make known

ventage, aperture, finger-hole

ventricle, cavity of the brain

Venus, goddess of love and beauty; wife of Vulcan, the smith-god, but more often associated with her lover Mars

verge, compass, circle

vexation, agitation, torment, grief

via, away

vice, character in a morality play representing a vice, jester, buffoon, gripping tool; to screw

vicegerent, deputy, representative

vicious, blameworthy, blemished

vie, add one to another

villein, peasant, servant

vinewed’st, most mouldy

violent, to rage, storm

virginalling, fingering as on the virginals—a keyed musical instrument

virtue, courage, merit, accomplishment, power, efficacy, essence, essential characteristic

virtuous, powerful, beneficial

visitor, one who visits to offer spiritual comfort

voice, speech, words, common talk, rumour, report, expressed opinion, judgement, vote, approval, authority to be heard; to acclaim, vote

voiding lobby, anteroom

voluntary, volunteer

votaress woman who has taken a vow

votarist, votary one who has taken a vow

vouch, assertion, testimony; affirm, guarantee, bear witness

vulcan, the smith-god, whose wife, Venus, was unfaithful

vulgar, of the common people, commonly known, common, public, mean; common people, vernacular





waft, to convey by water, beckon, turn

waftage, passage by water

wafture, wave

wage, to wager, hazard, attempt, carry on war, pay

waist, girdle

wake, remain awake, be up late for revelry or on guard, wear out with lack of sleep, arouse

walk, tract of forest

wall-eyed, white-eyed, having glaring eyes

want, lack, miss

wanton, frolicsome, lawless, capricious, luxurious, luxuriant, lustful, unchaste; spoilt child, pampered darling, roguish, sportful, unruly or lustful creature

wappered, worn out

ward, guard, custody, prison-cell, defensive position in fencing; guard, protect

warden, kind of cooking pear

warp, distort, deviate

war-proof, war-tested, courage

warrant, guarantee, assure

warrantize, surety, authorization

warranty, sanction, authorization

warren, game enclosure for rabbits

warrener, gamekeeper

wassail, drinking, revelling, feast

waste, spend, consume

watch, wakefulness, sleeplessness, watchfulness; be awake, keep from sleep, catch in the act

watchful, sleepless

water, lustre

water-gall, secondary rainbow

watering, drinking

water-standing, tearful

wave, waver

waxen, increase

weal, welfare, commonwealth

wear, fashion; carry, possess, be fashionable, weary

weather, storm

weed, garment, dress

week, to be in by the, be caught, ensnared, deeply in love

ween, expect, hope

weet, know

welkin, sky

well-liking, plump

well-respected, well-considered

well to live, prosperous

wharf, river bank

wheel, spinning wheel, tread-wheel on which a dog was harnessed to turn a roasting-spit

whelk, pimple

where, whereas

whiffler, officer who keeps the way clear for a procession

while, whiles, whilst, till

whipstock, whip-handle

whist, become silent

whiting-time, bleaching time

whitster, bleacher

whittle, small clasp-knife

whoremonger, user of prostitutes

wide, missing the mark, astray

widgeon, to cheat

wight, creature

wild, reckless, distracted, (of sea) open

wilderness, wildness of character, licentiousness

wildly, without cultivation, naturally

wildness, madness

will, sexual desire, sexual organ (male or female)

wimpled, hooded, blinkered

wince, kick

Winchester goose, sufferer from syphilis, prostitute

windgall, soft tumour on horse’s leg

windlass, circuit made to intercept game, crafty device

wink, sleep, close one’s eyes

wintered, used in winter

wipe, scar

wistly, intently, closely

wit, mental power, mind, sense, wisdom, imagination, one who has such qualities; know

withal, with this, with it, as well, at the same time, with

without, beyond

wittol, a man aware of and tolerating his wife’s adultery

witty, wise, cunning

woman-tired, henpecked

wonder, admiration; admire, marvel

wondered, performing wonders

wondering, admiration

wood, mad

woodcock, dupe

woodman, hunter

woolward, wearing wool next to the skin

world, to go to the, marry; a woman of the, married woman

worm, serpent, snake

worn, exhausted, past

worship, dignity, honour, authority; to honour

wort, vegetable, unfermented beer

worthy, excellent, valuable, deserved, well-founded, fitting

wot, know

wrack, ruin, destruction

wreak, vengeance, revenge

wrest, tuning-key; take by force

wring, wrest, force, writhe, press painfully on

writ, document, writing, mandate, written command, scripture

writhled, wrinkled

wry, to swerve





Xantippe, scolding wife of the philosopher Socrates





yard, yard measure, penis

yare, ready, quick, moving lightly

yaw, sail out of course, lose direction

yellowness, jealousy

yellows, jaundice

yerk, thrust suddenly

youngly, youthfully, without experience

younker, fine young man, novice, greenhorn





zany, comic performer awkwardly imitating a clown or mountebank





INDEX OF FIRST LINES OF SONNETS



THE Sonnets are to be found on pp.. The numbers refer to their position in the sequence.





A woman’s face with nature’s own hand painted



Accuse me thus : that I have scanted all



Against my love shall be as I am now



Against that time—if ever that time come



Ah, wherefore with infection should he live



Alack, what poverty my muse brings forth



Alas, ’tis true, I have gone here and there



As a decrepit father takes delight



As an unperfect actor on the stage



As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow’st





Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press



Being your slave, what should I do but tend



Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan



Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took



But be contented when that fell arrest



But do thy worst to steal thyself away



But wherefore do not you a mightier way





Canst thou, Ocruel, say I love thee not



Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep





Devouring time, blunt thou the lion’s paws





Farewell—thou art too dear for my possessing



For shame deny that thou bear’st love to any



From fairest creatures we desire increase



From you have I been absent in the spring



Full many a glorious morning have I seen





How can I then return in happy plight



How can my muse want subject to invent



How careful was I when I took my way



How heavy do I journey on the way



How like a winter hath my absence been



How oft, when thou, my music, music play’st



How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame





I grant thou wert not married to my muse



I never saw that youpainting need



If my dear love were but the child of state



If the dull substance of my flesh were thought



If there be nothing new, but that which is



If thou survive my well-contented day



If thy soul check thee that I come so near



In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes



In loving thee thou know’st I am forsworn



In the old age black was not counted fair



Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye



Is it thy will thy image should keep open





Let me confess that we two must be twain



Let me not to the marriage of true minds



Let not my love be called idolatry



Let those who are in favour with their stars



Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore



Like as, to make our appetites more keen



Lo, as a care-full housewife runs to catch



Lo, in the orient when the gracious light



Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest



Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage



Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate



Love is too young to know what conscience is I





Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war



Mine eye hath played the painter, and hath steeled



Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly?



My glass shall not persuade me I am old



My love is as a fever, longing still



My love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming



My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun



My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still





No longer mourn for me when I am dead



No more be grieved at that which thou hast done



No, time, thou shalt not boast that I do change!



Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck



Not marble nor the gilded monuments



Not mine own fears nor the prophetic soul





O, call not me to justify the wrong



O, for my sake do you with fortune chide win



O, from what power hast thou this powerful might



O, how I faint when I of you do write



O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem



O, how thy worth with manners maysing



O, lest the world should task you to recite



O me, what eyes hath love put in my head



O never say that I was false of heart



O that you were yourself! But, love, you are



O thou my lovely boy, who in thy power



O truant muse, what shall be thy amends



Or I shall live your epitaph to make



Or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you





Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth





Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault



Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?



Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye



Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea



Since I left you mine eye is in my mind



So am I as the rich whose blessed key



So are you to my thoughts as food to life



So is it not with me as with that muse



So, now I have confessed that he is thine



So oft have I invoked thee for my muse



So shall I live supposing thou art true



Some glory in their birth, some in their skill



Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness



Sweet love, renew thy force. Be it not said





Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all



That god forbid, that made me first your slave



That thou are blamed shall not be thy defect



That thou hast her, it is not all my grief



That time of year thou mayst in me behold



That you were once unkind befriends me now



The forward violet thus did I chide



The little love-god lying once asleep



The other two, slight air and purging fire



Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now



Then let not winter’s ragged hand deface



Th’expense of spirit in a waste of shame



They that have power to hurt and will do none



Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me



Those hours that with gentle work did frame



Those lines that I before have writ do lie



Those lips that love’s own hand did make



Those parts of thee that the world’s eye doth view



Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits



Thou art as tyrannous so as thou art



Thou blind fool love, what dost thou to mine eyes



Thus can my love excuse the slow offence



Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn



Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts



Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain



Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear



Tired with all these, for restful death I cry



’Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed



To me, fair friend, you never can be old



Two loves I have, of comfort and despair





Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend





Was it the proud full sail of his great verse



Weary with toil I haste me to my bed



Were’t aught to me I bore the canopy



What is your substance, whereof are you made



What potions have I drunk of siren tears



What’s in the brain that ink may character



When forty winters shall besiege thy brow



When I consider every thing that grows



When I do count the clock that tells the time



When I have seen by time’s fell hand defaced



When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes



When in the chronicle of wasted time



When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see



When my love swears that she is made of truth



When thou shalt be disposed to set me light



When to the sessions of sweet silent thought



Where art thou, muse, that thou forget’st so long



Whilst I alonecall upon thy aid



Who is it that says most which can say more



Who will believe my verse in time to come



Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will



Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day



Why is my verse so barren of new pride





Your love and pity doth th‘impression fill





