The Life of Timon of Athens





1.1 Enter Poet ⌈at one door⌉, Painter carrying a picture [at another door], [followed by] Jeweller, Merchant, and Mercer, at several doors



POET

Good day, sir.

PAINTER I am glad you’re well.

POET

I have not seen you long. How goes the world?

PAINTER

It wears, sir, as it grows.

POET Ay, that’s well known.

But what particular rarity, what strange,

Which manifold record not matches?—See,

Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power

Hath conjured to attend.

⌈Merchant and Jeweller meet. Mercer passes over

the stage, and exits⌉

I know the merchant.

PAINTER

I know them both. Th’other’s a jeweller.

MERCHANT (to Jeweller)

O, ’tis a worthy lord!

JEWELLER Nay, that’s most fixed.

MERCHANT

A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,

To an untirable and continuate goodness.

He passes.

JEWELLER (showing a jewel) I have a jewel here.

MERCHANT

O, pray, let’s see’t. For the Lord Timon, sir?

JEWELLER

If he will touch the estimate. But for that—

POET (to himself)

‘When we for recompense have praised the vile,

It stains the glory in that happy verse

Which aptly sings the good.’

MERCHANT (to Jeweller) ’Tis a good form.

JEWELLER

And rich. Here is a water, look ye.

PAINTER (to Poet)

You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication

To the great lord.

POET A thing slipped idly from me.

Our poesy is as a gum which oozes

From whence ‘tis nourished. The fire i’th’ flint

Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame

Provokes itself, and like the current flies

Each bound it chafes. What have you there?

PAINTER

A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?

POET

Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.

Let’s see your piece.

PAINTER (showing the picture) ’Tis a good piece.

POET

So ’tis. This comes off well and excellent.

PAINTER

Indifferent.

POET Admirable. How this grace

Speaks his own standing! What a mental power

This eye shoots forth! How big imagination

Moves in this lip! To th’ dumbness of the gesture

One might interpret.

PAINTER

It is a pretty mocking of the life.

Here is a touch; is’t good?

POET I will say of it,

It tutors nature. Artificial strife

Lives in these touches livelier than life.

Enter certain Senators





PAINTER How this lord is followed!

POET

The senators of Athens. Happy man!

PAINTER Look, more.

⌈The Senators pass over the stage, and exeunt]

POET

You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.

I have in this rough work shaped out a man

Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug

With amplest entertainment. My free drift

Halts not particularly, but moves itself

In a wide sea of tax. No levelled malice

Infects one comma in the course I hold,

But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,

Leaving no tract behind.

PAINTER How shall I understand you?

POET I will unbolt to you.

You see how all conditions, how all minds,

As well of glib and slipp’ry creatures as

Of grave and austere quality, tender down

Their service to Lord Timon. His large fortune,

Upon his good and gracious nature hanging,

Subdues and properties to his love and tendance

All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer

To Apemantus, that few things loves better

Than to abhor himself; even he drops down

The knee before him, and returns in peace,

Most rich in Timon’s nod.

PAINTER I saw them speak together.

POET

Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill

Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o’th’ mount

Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures

That labour on the bosom of this sphere

To propagate their states. Amongst them all

Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed

One do I personate of Lord Timon’s frame,

Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,

Whose present grace to present slaves and servants

Translates his rivals.

PAINTER ’Tis conceived to scope.

This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,

With one man beckoned from the rest below,

Bowing his head against the steepy mount

To climb his happiness, would be well expressed

In our condition.

POET Nay, sir, but hear me on.

All those which were his fellows but of late,

Some better than his value, on the moment

Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,

Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,

Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him

Drink the free air.

PAINTER Ay, marry, what of these?

POET

When Fortune in her shift and change of mood

Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants,

Which laboured after him to the mountain’s top

Even on their knees and hands, let him fall down,

Not one accompanying his declining foot.

PAINTER ’Tis common.

A thousand moral paintings I can show

That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune’s

More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well

To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen

The foot above the head.

Trumpets sound. Enter Timon [wearing a rich

jewell, with a Messenger from Ventidius; Lucilius

⌈and other Servants] attending. Timon addresses

himself courteously to every suitor, then speaks to

the Messenger





TIMON Imprisoned is he, say you?

MESSENGER

Ay, my good lord. Five talents is his debt,

His means most short, his creditors most strait.

Your honourable letter he desires

To those have shut him up, which failing,

Periods his comfort.

TIMON Noble Ventidius! Well,

I am not of that feather to shake off

My friend when he must need me. I do know him

A gentleman that well deserves a help,

Which he shall have. I’ll pay the debt and free him.

MESSENGER Your lordship ever binds him.

TIMON

Commend me to him. I will send his ransom;

And, being enfranchised, bid him come to me.

’Tis not enough to help the feeble up,

But to support him after. Fare you well.

MESSENGER All happiness to your honour. Exit

Enter an Old Athenian





OLD ATHENIAN

Lord Timon, hear me speak.

TIMON Freely, good father.

OLD ATHENIAN

Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.

TIMON I have so. What of him?

OLD ATHENIAN

Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.

TIMON

Attends he here or no? Lucilius!

LUCILIUS (coming forward) Here at your lordship’s service.

OLD ATHENIAN

This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,

By night frequents my house. I am a man

That from my first have been inclined to thrift,

And my estate deserves an heir more raised

Than one which holds a trencher.

TIMON Well, what further?

OLD ATHENIAN

One only daughter have I, no kin else

On whom I may confer what I have got.

The maid is fair, o’th’ youngest for a bride,

And I have bred her at my dearest cost

In qualities of the best. This man of thine

Attempts her love. I prithee, noble lord,

Join with me to forbid him her resort.

Myself have spoke in vain.

TIMON The man is honest.

OLD ATHENIAN Therefore he will be, Timon.

His honesty rewards him in itself;

It must not bear my daughter.

TIMON Does she love him?

OLD ATHENIAN She is young and apt.

Our own precedent passions do instruct us

What levity’s in youth.

TIMON (to Lucilius) Love you the maid?

LUCILIUS

Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.

OLD ATHENIAN

If in her marriage my consent be missing,

I call the gods to witness, I will choose

Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,

And dispossess her all.

TIMON How shall she be endowed

If she be mated with an equal husband?

OLD ATHENIAN

Three talents on the present; in future, all.

TIMON

This gentleman of mine hath served me long.

To build his fortune I will strain a little,

For ’tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter.

What you bestow in him I’ll counterpoise,

And make him weigh with her.

OLD ATHENIAN Most noble lord,

Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.

TIMON

My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.

LUCILIUS

Humbly I thank your lordship. Never may

That state or fortune fall into my keeping

Which is not owed to you.

Exeunt Lucilius and Old Athenian

POET (presenting a poem to Timon)

Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!

TIMON

I thank you. You shall hear from me anon.

Go not away. (To Painter) What have you there, my

friend?

PAINTER

A piece of painting, which I do beseech

Your lordship to accept.

TIMON Painting is welcome.

The painting is almost the natural man;

For since dishonour traffics with man’s nature,

He is but outside; these pencilled figures are

Even such as they give out. I like your work,

And you shall find I like it. Wait attendance

Till you hear further from me.

PAINTER The gods preserve ye!

TIMON

Well fare you, gentleman. Give me your hand.

We must needs dine together. (To Jeweller) Sir, your jewel

Hath suffered under praise.

JEWELLER What, my lord, dispraise?

TIMON

A mere satiety of commendations.

If I should pay you for’t as ’tis extolled

It would unclew me quite.

JEWELLER My lord, ’tis rated

As those which sell would give; but you well know

Things of like value differing in the owners

Are prized by their masters. Believe’t, dear lord,

You mend the jewel by the wearing it.

TIMON Well mocked.

MERCHANT

No, my good lord, he speaks the common tongue

Which all men speak with him.

Enter Apemantus





TIMON Look who comes here.

Will you be chid?

JEWELLER We will bear, with your lordship.

MERCHANT He’ll spare none.

TIMON

Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus.

APEMANTUS

Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow—

When thou art Timon’s dog, and these knaves honest.

TIMON

Why dost thou call them knaves? Thou know’st them

not.

APEMANTUS Are they not Athenians?

TIMON Yes.

APEMANTUS Then I repent not.

JEWELLER You know me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS

Thou know’st I do. I called thee by thy name.

TIMON Thou art proud, Apemantus!

APEMANTUS Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.

TIMON Whither art going?

APEMANTUS To knock out an honest Athenian’s brains.

TIMON That’s a deed thou’It die for.

APEMANTUS Right, if doing nothing be death by th’ law.

TIMON

How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS The best for the innocence.

TIMON

Wrought he not well that painted it?

APEMANTUS He wrought better that made the painter, and yet he’s but a filthy piece of work.

PAINTER You’re a dog.

APEMANTUS Thy mother’s of my generation. What’s she, if I be a dog?

TIMON Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS No, I eat not lords.

TIMON An thou shouldst, thou’dst anger ladies.

APEMANTUS O, they eat lords. So they come by great bellies.

TIMON

That’s a lascivious apprehension.

APEMANTUS

So thou apprehend’st it; take it for thy labour.

TIMON

How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS Not so well as plain dealing, which will not cost a man a doit.

TIMON

What dost thou think ’tis worth?

APEMANTUS Not worth my thinking.

How now, poet?

POET How now, philosopher?

APEMANTUS Thou liest.

POET Art not one?

APEMANTUS Yes.

POET Then I lie not.

APEMANTUS Art not a poet?

POET Yes.

APEMANTUS Then thou liest. Look in thy last work, where thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.

POET That’s not feigned, he is so.

APEMANTUS Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labour. He that loves to be flattered is worthy o’th’ flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!

TIMON What wouldst do then, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS E’en as Apemantus does now: hate a lord with my heart.

TIMON What, thyself?

APEMANTUS Ay.

TIMON Wherefore?

APEMANTUS That I had no augury but to be a lord.-Art not thou a merchant?

MERCHANT Ay, Apemantus.

APEMANTUS

Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!

MERCHANT If traffic do it, the gods do it.

APEMANTUS

Traffic’s thy god, and thy god confound thee!

Trumpet sounds. Enter a Messenger





TIMON What trumpet’s that?

MESSENGER

’Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse

All of companionship.

TIMON (to Servants)

Pray entertain them. Give them guide to us.

[Exit one or more Servants]





[To Jeweller] You must needs dine with me.

[To Poet] Go not you hence

Till I have thanked you. [To Painter] When dinner’s done

Show me this piece. [To all] I am joyful of your sights.

Enter Alcibiades with [his horsemen]

Most welcome, sir!

APEMANTUS [aside] So, so, there.

Aches contract and starve your supple joints!

That there should be small love ’mongst these sweet

knaves,

And all this courtesy! The strain of man’s bred out

Into baboon and monkey.

ALCIBIADES (to Timon)

Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed

Most hungrily on your sight.

TIMON Right welcome, sir!

Ere we depart, we’ll share a bounteous time

In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.

Exeunt all but Apemantus

Enter two Lords





FIRST LORD

What time o’ day is’t, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS

Time to be honest.

FIRST LORD That time serves still.

APEMANTUS

The most accursed thou, that still omitt’st it.

SECOND LORD

Thou art going to Lord Timon’s feast?

APEMANTUS

Ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools.

SECOND LORD Fare thee well, fare thee well.

APEMANTUS

Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.

SECOND LORD Why, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give thee none.

FIRST LORD Hang thyself

APEMANTUS No, I will do nothing at thy bidding. Make thy requests to thy friend.

SECOND LORD Away, unpeaceable dog, or I’ll spurn thee hence.

APEMANTUS I will fly, like a dog, the heels o’th’ ass.

Exit

FIRST LORD

He’s opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,

And taste Lord Timon’s bounty? He outgoes

The very heart of kindness.

SECOND LORD

He pours it out. Plutus the god of gold

Is but his steward; no meed but he repays

Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him

But breeds the giver a return exceeding

All use of quittance.

FIRST LORD The noblest mind he carries

That ever governed man.

SECOND LORD

Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?

⌈FIRST LORD⌉ I’ll keep you company. Exeunt





1.2 Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet served in, ⌈Flavius and Servants attending⌉; and then enter Timon, Alcibiades, the Senators, the Athenian Lords, and Ventidius which Timon redeemed from prison. Then comes, dropping after all, Apemantus, discontentedly, like himself



VENTIDIUS

Most honoured Timon, it hath pleased the gods to

remember

My father’s age and call him to long peace.

He is gone happy, and has left me rich.

Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound

To your free heart, I do return those talents,

Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help

I derived liberty.

TIMON O, by no means,

Honest Ventidius. You mistake my love.

I gave it freely ever, and there’s none

Can truly say he gives if he receives.

If our betters play at that game, we must not dare

To imitate them. Faults that are rich are fair.

VENTIDIUS

A noble spirit!

⌈The Lords stand with ceremony⌉





TIMON Nay, my lords,

Ceremony was but devised at first

To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,

Recanting goodness, sorry ere ’tis shown;

But where there is true friendship, there needs none.

Pray sit. More welcome are ye to my fortunes

Than my fortunes to me.

⌈They sit⌉





FIRST LORD

My lord, we always have confessed it.

APEMANTUS

Ho, ho, confessed it? Hanged it, have you not?

TIMON

O, Apemantus! You are welcome.

APEMANTUS No,

You shall not make me welcome.

I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

TIMON

Fie, thou‘rt a churl. Ye’ve got a humour there

Does not become a man; ’tis much to blame.

They say, my lords, Ira furor brevis est,

But yon man is ever angry.

Go, let him have a table by himself,

For he does neither affect company

Nor is he fit for’t, indeed.

APEMANTUS

Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon.

I come to observe, I give thee warning on’t.

TIMON

I take no heed of thee; thou’rt an Athenian,

Therefore welcome. I myself would have no power:

Prithee, let my meat make thee silent.

APEMANTUS I scorn thy meat. ‘Twould choke me, for I should ne’er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of men eats Timon, and he sees ‘em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one man’s blood; and all the madness is, he cheers them up, too. I wonder men dare trust themselves with men. Methinks they should invite them without knives: Good for their meat, and safer for their lives. There’s much example for’t. The fellow that sits next him, now parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest man to kill him. ’T’as been proved. If I were a huge man, I should fear to drink at meals, Lest they should spy my windpipe’s dangerous notes. Great men should drink with harness on their throats.

TIMON (drinking to a Lord)

My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.

SECOND LORD

Let it flow this way, my good lord.

APEMANTUS ‘Flow this way’? A brave fellow; he keeps his tides well. Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.

Here’s that which is too weak to be a sinner:

Honest water, which ne‘er left man i’th’ mire.

This and my food are equals; there’s no odds.

Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.

Apemantus’ grace

Immortal gods, I crave no pelf.

I pray for no man but myself.

Grant I may never prove so fond

To trust man on his oath or bond,

Or a harlot for her weeping,

Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,

Or a keeper with my freedom,

Or my friends if I should need ’em.

Amen. So fall to’t.

Rich men sin, and I eat root.

⌈He eats⌉





Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus.

TIMON Captain Alcibiades, your heart’s in the field now.

ALCIBIADES My heart is ever at your service, my lord.

TIMON You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than a dinner of friends.

ALCISIADES So they were bleeding new, my lord; there’s no meat like ’em. I could wish my best friend at such a feast.

APEMANTUS

Would all those flatterers were thine enemies then,

That thou mightst kill ‘em and bid me to ’em.

FIRST LORD (to Timon) Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that you would once use our hearts, whereby we might express some part of our zeals, we should think ourselves for ever perfect.

TIMON O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves have provided that I shall have much help from you. How had you been my friends else? Why have you that charitable title from thousands, did not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told more of you to myself than you can with modesty speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm you. ‘O you gods,’ think I, ‘what need we have any friends if we should ne’er have need of ‘em? They were the most needless creatures living, should we ne’er have use for ‘em, and would most resemble sweet instruments hung up in cases, that keeps their sounds to themselves.’ Why, I have often wished myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We are born to do benefits; and what better or properer can we call our own than the riches of our friends? O, what a precious comfort ‘tis to have so many like brothers commanding one another’s fortunes! O, joy’s e’en made away ere’t can be born: mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks. To forget their faults, I drink to you.

APEMANTUS Thou weep’st to make them drink, Timon.

SECOND LORD (to Timon)

Joy had the like conception in our eyes,

And at that instant like a babe sprung up.

APEMANTUS

Ho, ho, I laugh to think that babe a bastard.

THIRD LORD (to Timon)

I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.

APEMANTUS Much!

A tucket sounds within





TIMON What means that trump?

Enter a Servant





How now?

SERVANT Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies most desirous of admittance.

TIMON Ladies? What are their wills?

SERVANT There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, which bears that office to signify their pleasures.

TIMON I pray let them be admitted.

Enter one as Cupid





CUPID

Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all

That of his bounties taste! The five best senses

Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely

To gratulate thy plenteous bosom. Th’ear,

Taste, touch, smell, all, pleased from thy table rise.

They only now come but to feast thine eyes.

TIMON

They’re welcome all. Let ’em have kind admittance.

Music make their welcome! Exit Cupid

⌈FIRST LORD⌉

You see, my lord, how ample you’re beloved.

Music. Enter a masque of Ladies as Amazons, with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing





APEMANTUS

Hey-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!

They dance? They are madwomen.

Like madness is the glory of this life

As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.

We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves,

And spend our flatteries to drink those men

Upon whose age we void it up again

With poisonous spite and envy.

Who lives that’s not depraved or depraves?

Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves

Of their friends’ gift?

I should fear those that dance before me now

Would one day stamp upon me. ’T’as been done.

Men shut their doors against a setting sun.

The Lords rise from table with much adoring of

Timon; and to show their loves each singles out an

Amazon, and all dance, men with women, a lofty

strain or two to the hautboys; and cease





TIMON

You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,

Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,

Which was not half so beautiful and kind.

You have added worth unto’t and lustre,

And entertained me with mine own device.

I am to thank you for’t.

FIRST ⌈LADY⌉

My lord, you take us even at the best.

APEMANTUS Faith; for the worst is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.

TIMON

Ladies, there is an idle banquet ’tends you.

Please you to dispose yourselves.

ALL LADIES Most thankfully, my lord. Exeunt Ladies

TIMON Flavius.

FLAVIUS My lord.

TIMON The little casket bring me hither.

FLAVIUS Yes, my lord. (Aside) More jewels yet?

There is no crossing him in’s humour,

Else I should tell him well, i‘faith I should.

When all’s spent, he’d be crossed then, an he could.

’Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,

That man might ne’er be wretched for his mind. Exit

FIRST LORD Where be our men?

SERVANT Here, my lord, in readiness.

SECOND LORD Our horses. ⌈Exit Servant⌉

Enter Flavius with the casket. He gives it to Timon, ⌈and exits⌉





TIMON

O my friends, I have one word to say to you.

Look you, my good lord,

I must entreat you honour me so much

As to advance this jewel. Accept and wear it,

Kind my lord.

FIRST LORD

I am so far already in your gifts.

ALL LORDS So are we all.

Timon gives them jewels.

Enter a Servant





FIRST SERVANT My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate newly alighted and come to visit you.

TIMON They are fairly welcome. Exit Servant

Enter Flavius





FLAVIUS I beseech your honour, vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.

TIMON

Near? Why then, another time I’ll hear thee.

I prithee, let’s be provided to show them entertainment.

FLAVIUS I scarce know how.

Enter a Second Servant





SECOND SERVANT

May it please your honour, Lord Lucius

Out of his free love hath presented to you

Four milk-white horses trapped in silver.

TIMON

I shall accept them fairly. Let the presents

Be worthily entertained.

Exit Servant

Enter a Third Servant





How now, what news?

THIRD SERVANT Please you, my lord, that honourable gentleman Lord Lucullus entreats your company tomorrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour two brace of greyhounds.

TIMON

I’ll hunt with him, and let them be received

Not without fair reward. Exit Servant

FLAVIUS (aside) What will this come to?

He commands us to provide and give great gifts,

And all out of an empty coffer;

Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this:

To show him what a beggar his heart is,

Being of no power to make his wishes good.

His promises fly so beyond his state

That what he speaks is all in debt, he owes

For every word. He is so kind that he now

Pays interest for’t. His land’s put to their books.

Well, would I were gently put out of office

Before I were forced out.

Happier is he that has no friend to feed

Than such that do e’en enemies exceed.

I bleed inwardly for my lord. Exit

TIMON (to the Lords) You do yourselves

Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits.

(To Second Lord) Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.

SECOND LORD

With more than common thanks I will receive it.

THIRD LORD

O, he’s the very soul of bounty!

TIMON (to First Lord) And now I remember, my lord, you gave good words the other day of a bay courser I rode on. ’Tis yours, because you liked it.

FIRST LORD

O I beseech you pardon me, my lord, in that.

TIMON

You may take my word, my lord, I know no man

Can justly praise but what he does affect.

I weigh my friends’ affection with mine own.

I’ll tell you true, I’ll call to you.

ALL LORDS O, none so welcome.

TIMON

I take all and your several visitations

So kind to heart, ‘tis not enough to give.

Methinks I could deal kingdoms to my friends,

And ne’er be weary. Alcibiades,

Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich.

⌈Giving a present⌉ It comes in charity to thee, for all

thy living

Is ’mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast

Lie in a pitched field.

ALCIBIADES Ay, defiled land, my lord.

FIRST LORD We are so virtuously bound—

TIMON And so am I to you.

SECOND LORD So infinitely endeared—

TIMON All to you. Lights, more lights!

FIRST LORD

The best of happiness, honour, and fortunes

Keep with you, Lord Timon.

TIMON Ready for his friends.

Exeunt all but Timon and Apemantus

APEMANTUS What a coil’s here,

Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!

I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums

That are given for ’em. Friendship’s full of dregs.

Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.

Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtseys.

TIMON

Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen

I would be good to thee.

APEMANTUS No, I’ll nothing; for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou giv’st so long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in paper shortly. What needs these feasts, pomps, and vainglories?

TIMON Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am sworn not to give regard to you.

Farewell, and come with better music. Exit

APEMANTUS SO.

Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt not then.

I’ll lock thy heaven from thee. O, that men’s ears

should be

To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!

Exit





2.1 Enter a Senator ⌈With bonds⌉



SENATOR

And late five thousand. To Varro and to Isidore

He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,

Which makes it five-and-twenty. Still in motion

Of raging waste! It cannot hold, it will not.

If I want gold, steal but a beggar’s dog

And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.

If I would sell my horse and buy twenty more

Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon—

Ask nothing, give it him—it foals me straight,

And able horses. No porter at his gate,

But rather one that smiles and still invites

All that pass by. It cannot hold. No reason

Can sound his state in safety. Caphis ho!

Caphis, I say!

Enter Caphis





CAPHIS Here, sir. What is your pleasure?

SENATOR

Get on your cloak and haste you to Lord Timon.

Importune him for my moneys. Be not ceased

With slight denial, nor then silenced when

‘Commend me to your master’, and the cap

Plays in the right hand, thus; but tell him

My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn

Out of mine own, his days and times are past,

And my reliances on his fracted dates

Have smit my credit. I love and honour him,

But must not break my back to heal his finger.

Immediate are my needs, and my relief

Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,

But find supply immediate. Get you gone.

Put on a most importunate aspect,

A visage of demand, for I do fear

When every feather sticks in his own wing

Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,

Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.

CAPHIS

I go, sir.

SENATOR ⌈giving him bonds⌉

Take the bonds along with you,





And have the dates in count.

CAPHIS I will, sir.

SENATOR Go.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





2.2 Enter Flavius, with many bills in his hand



FLAVIUS

No care, no stop; so senseless of expense

That he will neither know how to maintain it

Nor cease his flow of riot, takes no account

How things go from him, nor resumes no care

Of what is to continue. Never mind

Was to be so unwise to be so kind.

What shall be done? He will not hear till feel.

⌈A sound of horns within⌉





I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.

Fie, fie, fie, fie!

Enter Caphis ⌈at one door⌉ and Servants of Isidore and Varro ⌈at another door⌉





CAPHIS

Good even, Varro. What, you come for money?

VARRO’S SERVANT Is’t not your business too?

CAPHIS

It is; and yours too, Isidore?

ISIDORE’S SERVANT It is SO.

CAPHIS

Would we were all discharged.

VARRO’S SERVANT I fear it.

CAPHIS Here comes the lord.

Enter Timon and his train, amongst them Alcibiades, ⌈as from hunting⌉





TIMON

So soon as dinner’s done we’ll forth again,

My Alcibiades.

Caphis meets Timon





With me? What is your will?

CAPHIS

My lord, here is a note of certain dues.

TIMON Dues? Whence are you?

CAPHIS Of Athens here, my lord.

TIMON Go to my steward.

CAPHIS

Please it your lordship, he hath put me off,

To the succession of new days, this month.

My master is awaked by great occasion

To call upon his own, and humbly prays you

That with your other noble parts you’ll suit

In giving him his right.

TIMON Mine honest friend,

I prithee but repair to me next morning.

CAPHIS

Nay, good my lord.

TIMON Contain thyself, good friend.

VARRO’S SERVANT

One Varro’s servant, my good lord.

ISIDORE’S SERVANT (to Timon)

From Isidore. He humbly prays your speedy payment.

CAPHIS (to Timon)

If you did know, my lord, my master’s wants—

VARRO’S SERVANT (to Timon)

’Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks and past.

ISIDORE’S SERVANT (to Timon)

Your steward puts me off, my lord, and I

Am sent expressly to your lordship.

TIMON Give me breath.—

I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on.

I’ll wait upon you instantly.

Exeunt Alcibiades and Timon’s train

(To Flavius) Come hither. Pray you,

How goes the world, that I am thus encountered

With clamorous demands of broken bonds

And the detention of long-since-due debts,

Against my honour?

FLAVIUS (to Servants) Please you, gentlemen,

The time is unagreeable to this business;

Your importunacy cease till after dinner,

That I may make his lordship understand

Wherefore you are not paid.

TIMON (to Servants) Do so, my friends.

(To Flavius) See them well entertained. Exit

FLAVIUS Pray draw near.

Exit

Enter Apemantus and Fool





CAPHIS

Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus.

Let’s ha’ some sport with ’em.

VARRO’S SERVANT Hang him, he’ll abuse us.

ISIDORE’S SERVANT A plague upon him, dog!

VARRO’S SERVANT How dost, fool?

APEMANTUS Dost dialogue with thy shadow?

VARRO’S SERVANT I speak not to thee.

APEMANTUS No, ’tis to thyself, (To Fool) Come away.

ISIDORE’S SERVANT (to Varro’s Servant) There’s the fool hangs on your back already.

APEMANTUs No, thou stand‘st single: thou’rt not on him yet.

CAPHIS (to Isidore’s Servant) Where’s the fool now?

APEMANTUS He last asked the question. Poor rogues’ and usurers’ men, bawds between gold and want.

ALL SERVANTS What are we, Apemantus? 6

APEMANTUS Asses.

ALL SERVANTS Why?

APEMANTUS That you ask me what you are, and do not know yourselves. Speak to ’em, fool.

FOOL How do you, gentlemen?

ALL SERVANTS Gramercies, good fool. How does your mistress?

FOOL She’s e’en setting on water to scald such chickens as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth.

APEMANTUS Good; gramercy.

Enter Page with two letters





FOOL Look you, here comes my mistress’ page.

PAGE Why, how now, captain? What do you in this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee profitably.

PAGE Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of these letters. I know not which is which.

APEMANTUS Canst not read?

PAGE No.

APEMANTUS There will little learning die then that day thou art hanged. This is to Lord Timon, this to Alcibiades. Go, thou wast born a bastard, and thou’lt die a bawd.

PAGE Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish a dog’s death. Answer not; I am gone. Exit

APEMANTUS E‘en so thou outrunn’st grace. Fool, I will go with you to Lord Timon’s.

FOOL Will you leave me there?

APEMANTUS If Timon stay at home. (To Servants) You three serve three usurers?

ALL SERVANTS Ay. Would they served us.

APEMANTUS So would I: as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.

FOOL Are you three usurers’ men?

ALL SERVANTS Ay, fool. 95

FOOL I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant. My mistress is one, and I am her fool. When men come to borrow of your masters they approach sadly and go away merry, but they enter my mistress’s house merrily and go away sadly. The reason of this?

VARRO’S SERVANT I could render one.

APEMANTUS Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster and a knave, which notwithstanding thou shalt be no less esteemed.

VARRO’S SERVANT What is a whoremaster, fool?

FOOL A fool in good clothes, and something like thee. ’Tis a spirit; sometime ’t appears like a lord, sometime like a lawyer, sometime like a philosopher with two stones more than’s artificial one. He is very often like a knight; and generally in all shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore to thirteen, this spirit walks in.

VARRO’S SERVANT Thou art not altogether a fool.

FOOL Nor thou altogether a wise man. As much foolery as I have, so much wit thou lack ’st.

APEMANTUS That answer might have become Apemantus. Enter Timon and Flavius

ALL SERVANTS Aside, aside, here comes Lord Timon.

APEMANTUS Come with me, fool, come.

FOOL I do not always follow lover, elder brother, and woman: sometime the philosopher.

Exeunt Apemantus and Fool

FLAVIUS (to Servants)

Pray you, walk near. I’ll speak with you anon.

Exeunt Servants

TIMON

You make me marvel wherefore ere this time

Had you not fully laid my state before me,

That I might so have rated my expense

As I had leave of means.

FLAVIUS You would not hear me.

At many leisures I proposed—

TIMON Go to.

Perchance some single vantages you took,

When my indisposition put you back,

And that unaptness made your minister

Thus to excuse yourself.

FLAVIUS O my good lord,

At many times I brought in my accounts,

Laid them before you; you would throw them off

And say you summed them in mine honesty.

When for some trifling present you have bid me

Return so much, I have shook my head and wept,

Yea, ‘gainst th’authority of manners prayed you

To hold your hand more close. I did endure

Not seldom nor no slight checks when I have

Prompted you in the ebb of your estate

And your great flow of debts. My lovèd lord—

Though you hear now too late, yet now’s a time—

The greatest of your having lacks a half

To pay your present debts.

TIMON Let all my land be sold.

FLAVIUS

‘Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone,

And what remains will hardly stop the mouth

Of present dues. The future comes apace.

What shall defend the interim, and at length

How goes our reck’ning?

TIMON

To Lacedaemon did my land extend.

FLAVIUS

O my good lord, the world is but a word.

Were it all yours to give it in a breath,

How quickly were it gone.

TIMON You tell me true.

FLAVIUS

If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,

Call me before th’exactest auditors

And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,

When all our offices have been oppressed

With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept

With drunken spilth of wine, when every room

Hath blazed with lights and brayed with minstrelsy,

I have retired me to a wasteful cock,

And set mine eyes at flow.

TIMON Prithee, no more.

FLAVIUS

‘Heavens,’ have I said, ‘the bounty of this lord!

How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants

This night englutted! Who is not Timon’s?

What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord

Timon’s?

Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!

Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,

The breath is gone whereof this praise is made.

Feast won, fast lost; one cloud of winter show’rs,

These flies are couched.’

TIMON Come, sermon me no further.

No villainous bounty yet hath passed my heart.

Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.

Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack

To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart.

If I would broach the vessels of my love

And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,

Men and men’s fortunes could I frankly use

As I can bid thee speak.

FLAVIUS Assurance bless your thoughts!

TIMON

And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned

That I account them blessings, for by these

Shall I try friends. You shall perceive how you

Mistake my fortunes. I am wealthy in my friends.—

Within there, Flaminius, Servilius!

Enter Flaminius, Servilius, and a Third Servant





ALL SERVANTS

My lord, my lord.

TIMON I will dispatch you severally,

(To Servilius) You to Lord Lucius,

(To Flaminius) to Lord Lucullus you—

I hunted with his honour today—

(To Third Servant) You to Sempronius. Commend me

to their loves,

And I am proud, say, that my occasions have

Found time to use ’em toward a supply of money.

Let the request be fifty talents.

FLAMINIUS As you have said, my lord. Exeunt Servants

FLAVIUS

Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Hmh!

TIMON

Go you, sir, to the senators,

Of whom, even to the state’s best health, I have

Deserved this hearing. Bid ‘em send o’th’ instant

A thousand talents to me.

FLAVIUS I have been bold,

For that I knew it the most general way,

To them, to use your signet and your name;

But they do shake their heads, and I am here

No richer in return.

TIMON Is’t true? Can’t be?

FLAVIUS

They answer in a joint and corporate voice

That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot

Do what they would, are sorry, you are honourable,

But yet they could have wished—they know not—

Something hath been amiss—a noble nature

May catch a wrench—would all were well—’tis pity;

And so, intending other serious matters,

After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,

With certain half-caps and cold moving nods

They froze me into silence.

TIMON You gods reward them!

Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows

Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.

Their blood is caked, ‘tis cold, it seldom flows.

’Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;

And nature as it grows again toward earth

Is fashioned for the journey dull and heavy.

Go to Ventidius. Prithee, be not sad.

Thou art true and honest—ingenuously I speak—

No blame belongs to thee. Ventidius lately

Buried his father, by whose death he’s stepped

Into a great estate. When he was poor,

Imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,

I cleared him with five talents. Greet him from me.

Bid him suppose some good necessity

Touches his friend, which craves to be remembered

With those five talents. That had, give’t these fellows

To whom ‘tis instant due. Ne’er speak or think

That Timon’s fortunes ’mong his friends can sink.

FLAVIUS

I would I could not think it. That thought is bounty’s

foe:

Being free itself, it thinks all others so.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





3.1 Enter Flaminius, with a box under his cloak, waiting to speak with Lucullus. From his master, enters a Servant to him



LUCULLUS’ SERVANT I have told my lord of you. He is coming down to you.

FLAMINIUS I thank you, sir.

Enter Lucullus





LUCULLUS’ SERVANT Here’s my lord.

LUCULLUS (aside) One of Lord Timon’s men? A gift, I warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver basin and ewer tonight.—Ftaminius, honest Flaminius, you are very respectively welcome, sir. (To his Servant) Fill me some wine. Exit Servant And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord and master?

FLAMINIUS His health is well, sir.

LUCULLUS I am right glad that his health is well, sir. And what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?

FLAMINIUS Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir, which in my lord’s behalf I come to entreat your honour to supply, who, having great and instant occasion to use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to furnish him, nothing doubting your present assistance therein.

LUCULLUS La, la, la, la, ‘nothing doubting’ says he? Alas, good lord! A noble gentleman ’tis, if he would not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha’ dined with him and told him on‘t, and come again to supper to him of purpose to have him spend less; and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning by my coming. Every man has his fault, and honesty is his. I ha’ told him on’t, but I could ne’er get him from’t.

Enter Servant, with wine





SERVANT Please your lordship, here is the wine.

LUCULLUS Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. (Drinking) Here’s to thee!

FLAMINIUS Your lordship speaks your pleasure.

LUCULLUS I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit, give thee thy due, and one that knows what belongs to reason; and canst use the time well if the time use thee well. (Drinking) Good parts in thee! (To his Servant) Get you gone, sirrah. Exit Servant Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord’s a bountiful gentleman; but thou art wise, and thou know‘st well enough, although thou com’st to me, that this is no time to lend money, especially upon bare friendship without security. (Giving coins) Here’s three solidares for thee. Good boy, wink at me, and say thou saw’st me not. Fare thee well.

FLAMINIUS

Is’t possible the world should so much differ,

And we alive that lived?

He throws the coins at Lucullus





Fly, damned baseness,

To him that worships thee.

LUCULLUS Ha! Now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.

Exit

FLAMINIUS

May these add to the number that may scald thee.

Let molten coin be thy damnation,

Thou disease of a friend, and not himself.

Has friendship such a faint and milky heart

It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,

I feel my master’s passion! This slave

Unto this hour has my lord’s meat in him.

Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,

When he is turned to poison?

O, may diseases only work upon’t;

And when he’s sick to death, let not that part of nature

Which my lord paid for be of any power

To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.

Exit





3.2 Enter Lucius, with three Strangers



LUCIUS Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend, and an honourable gentleman.

FIRST STRANGER We know him for no less, though we are but strangers to him. But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon’s happy hours are done and past, and his estate shrinks from him.

LUCIUS Fie, no, do not believe it. He cannot want for money. 9

SECOND STRANGER But believe you this, my lord, that not long ago one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow so many talents—nay, urged extremely for‘t, and showed what necessity belonged to’t, and yet was denied.

LUCIUS How?

SECOND STRANGER I tell you, denied, my lord.

LUCIUS What a strange case was that! Now before the gods, I am ashamed on’t. Denied that honourable man? There was very little honour showed in’t. For my own part, I must needs confess I have received some small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels, and suchlike trifles—nothing comparing to his; yet had he not mistook him and sent to me, I should ne’er have denied his occasion so many talents.

Enter Servilius





SERVILIUS (aside) See, by good hap yonder’s my lord. I have sweat to see his honour. (To Lucius) My honoured lord!

⌈LUCIUS⌉ Servilius! You are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well. Commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very exquisite friend.

SERVILIUS May it please your honour, my lord hath sent—

LUCIUS Ha! What has he sent? I am so much endeared to that lord, he’s ever sending. How shall I thank him, think’st thou? And what has he sent now?

SERVILIUS He’s only sent his present occasion now, my lord, requesting your lordship to supply his instant use with so many talents.

⌈LUCIUS⌉

I know his lordship is but merry with me.

He cannot want fifty-five hundred talents.

SERVILIUS

But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.

If his occasion were not virtuous

I should not urge it half so faithfully.

LUCIUS

Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?

SERVILIUS Upon my soul, ’tis true, sir.

LUCIUS What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself against such a good time when I might ha’ shown myself honourable) How unluckily it happened that I should purchase the day before a little part, and undo a great deal of honour! Servilius, now before the gods I am not able to do, the more beast I, I say. I was sending to use Lord Timon myself—these gentlemen can witness—but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done’t now. Commend me bountifully to his good lordship; and I hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me because I have no power to be kind. And tell him this from me: I count it one of my greatest afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you befriend me so far as to use mine own words to him?

SERVILIUS Yes, sir, I shall.

LUCIUS

I’ll look you out a good turn, Servilius. Exit Servilius

True as you said: Timon is shrunk indeed;

And he that’s once denied will hardly speed. Exit

FIRST STRANGER

Do you observe this, Hostilius?

SECOND STRANGER Ay, too well.

FIRST STRANGER

Why, this is the world’s soul, and just of the same piece

Is every flatterer’s spirit. Who can call him his friend

That dips in the same dish? For, in my knowing,

Timon has been this lord’s father

And kept his credit with his purse,

Supported his estate; nay, Timon’s money

Has paid his men their wages. He ne’er drinks,

But Timon’s silver treads upon his lip;

And yet—O see the monstrousness of man

When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!—

He does deny him, in respect of his,

What charitable men afford to beggars.

THIRD STRANGER

Religion groans at it.

FIRST STRANGER For mine own part,

I never tasted Timon in my life,

Nor came any of his bounties over me

To mark me for his friend; yet I protest,

For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,

And honourable carriage,

Had his necessity made use of me

I would have put my wealth into donation

And the best half should have returned to him,

So much I love his heart. But I perceive

Men must learn now with pity to dispense,

For policy sits above conscience.

Exeunt





3.3 Enter Timon’s Third Servant, with Sempronius, another of Timon’s friends



SEMPRONIUS

Must he needs trouble me in’t? Hmh! ’Bove all others?

He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;

And now Ventidius is wealthy too,

Whom he redeemed from prison. All these

Owes their estates unto him.

SERVANT My lord,

They have all been touched and found base metal,

For they have all denied him.

SEMPRONIUS How, have they denied him?

Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him,

And does he send to me? Three? Hmhl

It shows but little love or judgement in him.

Must I be his last refuge? His friends, like physicians,

Thrive, give him over; must I take th’ cure upon me?

He’s much disgraced me in’t. I’m angry at him,

That might have known my place. I see no sense for’t

But his occasions might have wooed me first,

For, in my conscience, I was the first man

That e‘er received gift from him.

And does he think so backwardly of me now

That I’ll requite it last? No.

So it may prove an argument of laughter

To th’ rest, and I ’mongst lords be thought a fool.

I’d rather than the worth of thrice the sum

He’d sent to me first, but for my mind’s sake.

I’d such a courage to do him good. But now return,

And with their faint reply this answer join:

Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.

Exit

SERVANT Excellent. Your lordship’s a goodly villain. The devil knew not what he did when he made man politic—he crossed himself by’t, and I cannot think but in the end the villainies of man will set him clear. How fairly this lord strives to appear foul! Takes virtuous copies to be wicked, like those that under hot ardent zeal would set whole realms on fire; of such a nature is his politic love.

This was my lord’s best hope. Now all are fled

Save only the gods. Now his friends are dead.

Doors that were ne’er acquainted with their wards

Many a bounteous year must be employed

Now to guard sure their master;

And this is all a liberal course allows:

Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.

Exit





3.4 Enter Varro’s two Servants, meeting others, all Servants of Timon’s creditors, to wait for his coming out. Then enter ⌈Servants of ⌉Lucius, Titus, and Hortensius



VARRO’S ⌈FIRST⌉ SERVANT

Well met; good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.

TITUS’ SERVANT The like to you, kind Varro.

HORTENSIUS’ SERVANT

Lucius, what, do we meet together?

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Ay, and I think one business does command us all,

For mine is money.

TITUS’ SERVANT So is theirs and ours.

Enter ⌈a Servant of ⌉ Philotus





LUCIUS’ SERVANT

And Sir Philotus too!

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT Good day at once.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Welcome, good brother. What do you think the hour?

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT Labouring for nine.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT So much?

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT Is not my lord seen yet?

LUCIUS’ SERVANT Not yet.

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT

I wonder on’t; he was wont to shine at seven.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Ay, but the days are waxed shorter with him.

You must consider that a prodigal course

Is like the sun‘s,

But not, like his, recoverable. I fear

’Tis deepest winter in Lord Timon’s purse; that is,

One may reach deep enough, and yet find little.

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT I am of your fear for that.

TITUS’ SERVANT

I’ll show you how t’observe a strange event.

Your lord sends now for money?

HORTENSIUS’ SERVANT Most true, he does.

TITUS’ SERVANT

And he wears jewels now of Timon’s gift,

For which I wait for money.

HORTENSIUS’ SERVANT It is against my heart.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT Mark how strange it shows.

Timon in this should pay more than he owes,

And e‘en as if your lord should wear rich jewels

And send for money for ’em.

HORTENSIUS’ SERVANT

I’m weary of this charge, the gods can witness.

I know my lord hath spent of Timon’s wealth,

And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.

VARRO’S FIRST SERVANT

Yes; mine’s three thousand crowns. What’s yours?

LUCIUS’ SERVANT Five thousand, mine.

VARRO’S FIRST SERVANT

’is much deep, and it should seem by th’ sum

Your master’s confidence was above mine,

Else surely his had equalled.

Enter Flaminius

TITUS’ SERVANT One of Lord Timon’s men.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Flaminius! Sir, a word. Pray, is my lord 36

Ready to come forth?

FLAMINIUS No, indeed he is not.

TITUS’ SERVANT We attend his lordship.

Pray signify so much.

FLAMINIUS I need not tell

Him that; he knows you are too diligent.

Enter Flavius, muffled in a cloak





LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Ha, is not that his steward muffled so?

He goes away in a cloud. Call him, call him.

TITUS’ SERVANT (to Flavius) Do you hear, sir?

VARRO’S SECOND SERVANT (to Flavius) By your leave, sir.

FLAVIUS What do ye ask of me, my friend?

TITUS’ SERVANT

We wait for certain money here, sir.

FLAVIUS Ay,

If money were as certain as your waiting,

‘Twere sure enough.

Why then preferred you not your sums and bills

When your false masters ate of my lord’s meat?

Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts,

And take down th’int’est into their glutt’nous maws.

You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up.

Let me pass quietly.

Believe’, my lord and I have made an end.

I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Ay, but this answer will not serve.

FLAVIUS

If ‘twill not serve ’tis not so base as you,

For you serve knaves.

Exit

VARRO’S FIRST SERVANT How? What does his cashiered worship mutter?

VARRO’S SECOND SERVANT No matter what; he’s poor, and that’s revenge enough. Who can speak broader than he that has no house to put his head in? Such may rail against great buildings.

Enter Servilius





TITUS’ SERVANT O, here’s Servilius. Now we shall know some answer.

SERVILIUS If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some other hour, I should derive much from’t; for, take’t of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to discontent. His comfortable temper has forsook him. He’s much out of health, and keeps his chamber.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Many do keep their chambers are not sick,

And if it be so far beyond his health

Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts

And make a clear way to the gods.

SERVILIUS Good gods!

TITUS’ SERVANT

We cannot take this for an answer, sir.

FLAMINIUS (Within)

Servilius, helpl My lord, my lord!

Enter Timon in a rage





TIMON

What, are my doors opposed against my passage?

Have I been ever free, and must my house

Be my retentive enemy, my jail?

The place which I have feasted, does it now,

Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Put in now, Titus.

TITUS’ SERVANT My lord, here is my bill.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT

Here’s mine.

⌈HORTENSUS’ SERVANT⌉ And mine, my lord.

VARRO’S ⌈FIRST and⌉ SECOND SERVANTS And ours, my lord.

PHILOTUS’ SERVANT All our bills.

TIMON

Knock me down with ’em, cleave me to the girdle.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT Alas, my lord.

TIMON Cut my heart in sums. 90

TITUS’ SERVANT Mine fifty talents.

TIMON

Tell out my blood.

LUCIUS’ SERVANT Five thousand crowns, my lord.

TIMON

Five thousand drops pays that. What yours? And yours?





VARRO’S FIRST SERVANT My lord—

VARRO’S SECOND SERVANT My lord—

TIMON

Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you.

Exit

HORTENSIUS’ SERVANT Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps at their money. These debts may well be called desperate ones, for a madman owes ’em.

Exeunt





3.5 Enter Timon and Flavius



TIMON

They have e’en put my breath from me, the slaves.

Creditors? Devils!

FLAVIUS My dear lord—

TIMON What if it should be so?

FLAVIUS My lord—

TIMON

I’ll have it so. My steward!

FLAVIUS Here, my lord.

TIMON

So fitly? Go bid all my friends again:

Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius—all luxors, all.

I’ll once more feast the rascals.

FLAVIUS O my lord,

You only speak from your distracted soul.

There is not so much left to furnish out

A moderate table.

TIMON Be it not in thy care.

Go, I charge thee, invite them all. Let in the tide

Of knaves once more. My cook and I’ll provide.

Exeunt ⌈severally⌉





3.6 Enter three Senators at one door



FIRST SENATOR

My lords, you have my voice to’t. The fault’s bloody.

’Tis necessary he should die.

Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

SECOND SENATOR Most true; the law shall bruise ’im.

⌈Enter Alcibiades at another door, with attendants⌉





ALCIBIADES

Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!

FIRST SENATOR Now, captain.

ALCIBIADES

I am an humble suitor to your virtues;

For pity is the virtue of the law,

And none but tyrants use it cruelly.

It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy

Upon a friend of mine, who in hot blood

Hath stepped into the law, which is past depth

To those that without heed do plunge into’t.

He is a man, setting his feat aside,

Of comely virtues;

Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice—

An honour in him which buys out his fault—

But with a noble fury and fair spirit,

Seeing his reputation touched to death,

He did oppose his foe;

And with such sober and unnoted passion

He did behave his anger, ere ’twas spent,

As if he had but proved an argument.

FIRST SENATOR

You undergo too strict a paradox,

Striving to make an ugly deed look fair.

Your words have took such pains as if they laboured

To bring manslaughter into form, and set quarrelling

Upon the head of valour—which indeed

Is valour misbegot, and came into the world

When sects and factions were newly born.

He’s truly valiant that can wisely suffer

The worst that man can breathe, and make his

wrongs his outsides

To wear them like his raiment carelessly,

And ne‘er prefer his injuries to his heart

To bring it into danger.

If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,

What folly ’tis to hazard life for ill!

ALCIBIADES

My lord—

FIRST SENATOR You cannot make gross sins look clear.

To revenge is no valour, but to bear.

ALCIBIADES

My lords, then, under favour, pardon me

If I speak like a captain.

Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,

And not endure all threats, sleep upon‘t,

And let the foes quietly cut their throats

Without repugnancy? If there be

Such valour in the bearing, what make we

Abroad? Why then, women are more valiant

That stay at home if bearing carry it,

And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon

Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,

If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,

As you are great, be pitifully good.

Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?

To kill, I grant, is sin’s extremest gust,

But in defence, by mercy, ’tis most just.

To be in anger is impiety,

But who is man that is not angry?

Weigh but the crime with this.

SECOND SENATOR You breathe in vain.

ALCIBIADES In vain?

His service done at Lacedaemon and Byzantium

Were a sufficient briber for his life.

FIRST SENATOR

What’s that?

ALCIBIADES Why, I say, my lords, he’s done fair service,

And slain in fight many of your enemies.

How full of valour did he bear himself

In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!

SECOND SENATOR

He has made too much plenty with ‘em.

He’s a sworn rioter; he has a sin

That often drowns him and takes his valour prisoner.

If there were no foes, that were enough

To overcome him. In that beastly fury

He has been known to commit outrages

And cherish factions. ’Tis inferred to us

His days are foul and his drink dangerous.

FIRST SENATOR

He dies.

ALCIBIADES Hard fate! He might have died in war.

My lords, if not for any parts in him—

Though his right arm might purchase his own time

And be in debt to none—yet more to move you,

Take my deserts to his and join ’em both.

And for I know

Your reverend ages love security,

I’ll pawn my victories, all my honour to you

Upon his good returns.

If by this crime he owes the law his life,

Why, let the war receive’t in valiant gore,

For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

FIRST SENATOR

We are for law; he dies. Urge it no more,

On height of our displeasure. Friend or brother,

He forfeits his own blood that spills another.

ALCIBIADES

Must it be so? It must not be.

My lords, I do beseech you know me.

SECOND SENATOR How?

ALCIBIADES

Call me to your remembrances.

THIRD SENATOR What?

ALCIBIADES

I cannot think but your age has forgot me.

It could not else be I should prove so base

To sue and be denied such common grace.

My wounds ache at you.

FIRST SENATOR

Do you dare our anger?

’Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:

We banish thee for ever.

ALCIBIADES

Banish me?

Banish your dotage, banish usury

That makes the senate ugly.

FIRST SENATOR

If after two days’ shine

Athens contain thee, attend our weightier judgement;

And, not to swell your spirit, he shall be

Executed presently.

Exeunt Senators ⌈and attendants⌉

ALCIBIADES

Now the gods keep you old enough that you may live

Only in bone, that none may look on you!

I’m worse than mad. I have kept back their foes

While they have told their money and let out

Their coin upon large interest—I myself,

Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?

Is this the balsam that the usuring senate

Pours into captains’ wounds? Banishment!

It comes not ill; I hate not to be banished.

It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,

That I may strike at Athens. I’ll cheer up

My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.

’Tis honour with most lands to be at odds.

Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.

Exit





3.7 Enter divers of Timon’s friends, ⌈amongst⌉ them Lucullus, Lucius, Sempronius, and other Lords and Senators,⌉ at several doors



FIRST LORD The good time of day to you, sir.

SECOND LORD I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lord did but try us this other day.

FIRST LORD Upon that were my thoughts tiring when we encountered. I hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.

SECOND LORD It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.

FIRST LORD I should think so. He hath sent me an earnest inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me to put off, but he hath conjured me beyond them, and I must needs appear.

SECOND LORD In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am sorry when he sent to borrow of me that my provision was out.

FIRST LORD I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all things go.

SECOND LORD Every man hears so. What would he have borrowed of you?

FIRST LORD A thousand pieces.

SECOND LORD A thousand pieces?

FIRST LORD What of you?

SECOND LORD He sent to me, sir—

⌈Loud music.⌉ Enter Timon and attendants





Here he comes.

TIMON With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you?

FIRST LORD Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.

SECOND LORD The swallow follows not summer more willing than we your lordship.

TIMON (aside) Nor more willingly leaves winter, such summer birds are men.—Genttemen, our dinner will not recompense this long stay. Feast your ears with the music a while, if they will fare so harshly o’th’ trumpets’ sound; we shall to’t presently.

FIRST LORD I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship that I returned you an empty messenger.

TIMON O sir, let it not trouble you.

SECOND LORD My noble lord—

TIMON Ah, my good friend, what cheer?

⌈A table and stools are⌉ brought in





SECOND LORD My most honourable lord, I am e’en sick of shame that when your lordship this other day sent to me I was so unfortunate a beggar.

TIMON Think not on’t, sir.

SECOND LORD If you had sent but two hours before—

TIMON Let it not cumber your better remembrance.—Come, bring in all together.

⌈Enter Servants with covered dishes⌉





SECOND LORD All covered dishes.

FIRST LORD Royal cheer, I warrant you.

THIRD LORD Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it.

FIRST LORD How do you? What’s the news?

THIRD LORD Alcibiades is banished. Hear you of it?

FIRST and SECOND LORDS Alcibiades banished?

THIRD LORD ’Tis so, be sure of it.

FIRST LORD How, how?

SECOND LORD I pray you, upon what?

TIMON My worthy friends, will you draw near?

THIRD LORD I’ll tell you more anon. Here’s a noble feast toward.

SECOND LORD This is the old man still.

THIRD LORD Will’t hold, will’t hold?

SECOND LORD It does; but time will—and so—

THIRD LORD I do conceive. 64

TIMON Each man to his stool with that spur as he would to the lip of his mistress. Your diet shall be in all places alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place. Sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.

They sit





You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with thankfulness. For your own gifts make yourselves praised; but reserve still to give, lest your deities be despised. Lend to each man enough that one need not lend to another; for were your godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the gods. Make the meat be beloved more than the man that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without a score of villains. If there sit twelve women at the table, let a dozen of them be as they are. The rest of your foes, O gods—the senators of Athens, together with the common tag of people—what is amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for destruction. For these my present friends, as they are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them; and to nothing are they welcome.—Uncover, dogs, and lap.

The dishes are uncovered, and seen to be full of steaming water ⌈and stones⌉





SOME LORDS What does his lordship mean?

OTHER LORDS I know not.

TIMON

May you a better feast never behold,

You knot of mouth-friends. Smoke and lukewarm water

Is your perfection. This is Timon’s last,

Who, stuck and spangled with your flattery,

Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces

Your reeking villainy.

⌈He throws water in their faces⌉





Live loathed and long,





Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,

Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,

You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time’s flies,

Cap-and-knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!

Of man and beast the infinite malady

Crust you quite o’er.

⌈A Lord is going⌉





What, dost thou go?





Soft, take thy physic first. Thou too, and thou.

⌈He beats them⌉





Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.

Exeunt Lords, leaving caps and gowns

What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast

Whereat a villain’s not a welcome guest.

Burn house! Sink Athens! Henceforth hated be

Of Timon man and all humanity!

Exit

Enter the Senators and other Lords





FIRST LORD How now, my lords?

SECOND LORD

Know you the quality of Lord Timon’s fury?

THIRD LORD

Push! Did you see my cap?

FOURTH LORD I have lost my gown.

FIRST LORD He’s but a mad lord, and naught but humours sways him. He gave me a jewel th’other day, and now he has beat it out of my hat. Did you see my jewel?

⌈THIRD⌉ LORD Did you see my cap?

⌈SECOND⌉ LORD

Here ’tis.

FOURTH LORD Here lies my gown.

FIRST LORD Let’s make no stay.

SECOND LORD

Lord Timon’s mad.

THIRD LORD I feel’t upon my bones.

FOURTH LORD

One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.

Exeunt





4.1 Enter Timon



TIMON

Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall

That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth,

And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!

Obedience fail in children! Slaves and fools,

Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench

And minister in their steads! To general filths

Convert o‘th’ instant, green virginity!

Do’t in your parents’ eyes. Bankrupts, hold fast!

Rather than render back, out with your knives,

And cut your trusters’ throats. Bound servants, steal!

Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,

And pill by law. Maid, to thy master’s bed!

Thy mistress is o’th’ brothel. Son of sixteen,

Pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire;

With it beat out his brains! Piety and fear,

Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,

Domestic awe, night rest, and neighbourhood,

Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,

Degrees, observances, customs, and laws,

Decline to your confounding contraries,

And let confusion live! Plagues incident to men,

Your potent and infectious fevers heap

On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,

Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt

As lamely as their manners! Lust and liberty,

Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,

That ‘gainst the stream of virtue they may strive

And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,

Sow all th’Athenian bosoms, and their crop

Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,

That their society, as their friendship, may

Be merely poison!

⌈He tears off his clothes⌉





Nothing I’ll bear from thee





But nakedness, thou detestable town;

Take thou that too, with multiplying bans.

Timon will to the woods, where he shall find

Th‘unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.

The gods confound—hear me you good gods all—

Th’Athenians, both within and out that wall;

And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow

To the whole race of mankind, high and low.

Amen.

Exit





4.2 Enter Flavius, with two or three Servants



FIRST SERVANT

Hear you, master steward, where’s our master?

Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?

FLAVIUS

Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?

Let me be recorded: by the righteous gods,

I am as poor as you.

FIRST SERVANT Such a house broke,

So noble a master fall’n? All gone, and not

One friend to take his fortune by the arm

And go along with him?

SECOND SERVANT As we do turn our backs

From our companion thrown into his grave,

So his familiars to his buried fortunes

Slink all away, leave their false vows with him

Like empty purses picked; and his poor self,

A dedicated beggar to the air,

With his disease of all-shunned poverty,

Walks like contempt alone.

Enter other Servants





More of our fellows.

FLAVIUS

All broken implements of a ruined house.

THIRD SERVANT

Yet do our hearts wear Timon’s livery.

That see I by our faces. We are fellows still,

Serving alike in sorrow. Leaked is our barque,

And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck

Hearing the surges’ threat. We must all part

Into this sea of air.

FLAVIUS

Good fellows all,

The latest of my wealth I’ll share amongst you.

Wherever we shall meet, for Timon’s sake

Let’s yet be fellows. Let’s shake our heads and say,

As ‘twere a knell unto our master’s fortunes,

’We have seen better days.’

He gives them money





Let each take some.

Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more.

Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.

They embrace, and the Servants part several ways





O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!

Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,

Since riches point to misery and contempt?

Who would be so mocked with glory, or to live

But in a dream of friendship,

To have his pomp and all what state compounds

But only painted like his varnished friends?

Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,

Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood

When man’s worst sin is he does too much good!

Who then dares to be half so kind again?

For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.

My dearest lord, blessed to be most accursed,

Rich only to be wretched, thy great fortunes

Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!

He’s flung in rage from this ingrateful seat

Of monstrous friends;

Nor has he with him to supply his life,

Or that which can command it.

I’ll follow and enquire him out.

I’ll ever serve his mind with my best will.

Whilst I have gold I’ll be his steward still.

Exit





4.3 Enter Timon ⌈from his cave⌉ in the woods, ⌈half naked, and with a spade⌉



TIMON

O blessèd breeding sun, draw from the earth

Rotten humidity; below thy sister’s orb

Infect the air. Twinned brothers of one womb,

Whose procreation, residence, and birth

Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,

The greater scorns the lesser. Not nature,

To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune

But by contempt of nature.

It is the pasture lards the brother’s sides,

The want that makes him lean.

Raise me this beggar and demit that lord,

The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,

The beggar native honour. Who dares, who dares

In purity of manhood stand upright

And say ‘This man’s a flatterer’? If one be,

So are they all, for every grece of fortune

Is smoothed by that below. The learnèd pate

Ducks to the golden fool. All’s obliquy;

There’s nothing level in our cursed natures

But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred

All feasts, societies, and throngs of men.

His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains.

Destruction fang mankind. Earth, yield me roots.

He digs





Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate

With thy most operant poison.

He finds gold





What is here?

Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious gold?

No, gods, I am no idle votarist:

Roots, you clear heavens. Thus much of this will

make

Black white, foul fair, wrong right,

Base noble, old young, coward valiant.

Ha, you gods! Why this, what, this, you gods? Why,

this

Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,

Pluck stout men’s pillows from below their heads.

This yellow slave

Will knit and break religions, bless th’accursed,

Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves,

And give them title, knee, and approbation

With senators on the bench. This is it

That makes the wappered widow wed again.

She whom the spittle house and ulcerous sores

Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices

To th’ April day again. Come, damned earth,

Thou common whore of mankind, that puts odds

Among the rout of nations; I will make thee

Do thy right nature.

March afar off





Ha, a drum! Thou’rt quick;





But yet I’ll bury thee.

He buries gold





Thou’lt go, strong thief,

When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.

He keeps some gold





Nay, stay thou out for earnest.

Enter Alcibiades, with soldiers playing drum and

fife, in warlike manner; and Phrynia and Timandra





ALCIBIADES What art thou there? Speak.

TIMON

A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart

For showing me again the eyes of man.

ALCIBIADES

What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee

That art thyself a man?

TIMON

I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.

For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,

That I might love thee something.

ALCIBIADES I know thee well,

But in thy fortunes am unlearned and strange.

TIMON

I know thee too, and more than that I know thee

I not desire to know. Follow thy drum.

With man’s blood paint the ground gules, gules.

Religious canons, civil laws, are cruel;

Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine

Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,

For all her cherubin look.

PHRYNIA Thy lips rot off!

TIMON

I will not kiss thee; then the rot returns

To thine own lips again.

ALCIBIADES

How came the noble Timon to this change?

TIMON

As the moon does, by wanting light to give.

But then renew I could not like the moon;

There were no suns to borrow of.

ALCIBIADES

Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?

TIMON

None but to maintain my opinion.

ALCIBIADES What is it, Timon?

TIMON Promise me friendship, but perform none. If thou wilt promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art a man. If thou dost not perform, confound thee, for thou art a man.

ALCIBIADES

I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.

TIMON

Thou saw’st them when I had prosperity.

ALCIBIADES

I see them now; then was a blessèd time.

TIMON

As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.

TIMANDRA

Is this th’Athenian minion, whom the world

Voiced so regardfully?

SIMON Art thou Timandra?

TIMANDRA Yes.

TIMON

Be a whore still. They love thee not that use thee.

Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.

Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves

For tubs and baths, bring down rose-cheeked youth

To the tub-fast and the diet.

TIMANDRA Hang thee, monster!

ALCIBIADES

Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits

Are drowned and lost in his calamities.

I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,

The want whereof doth daily make revolt

In my penurious band. I have heard and grieved

How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,

Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states

But for thy sword and fortune trod upon them—

TIMON

I prithee, beat thy drum and get thee gone.

ALCIBIADES

I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.

TIMON

How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?

I had rather be alone.

ALCIBIADES Why, fare thee well.

Here is some gold for thee.

TIMON Keep it. I cannot eat it.

ALCIBIADES

When I have laid proud Athens on a heap—

TIMON

Warr‘st thou ’gainst Athens?

ALCIBIADES Ay, Timon, and have cause.

TIMON

The gods confound them all in thy conquest,

And thee after, when thou hast conquered.

ALCIBIADES

Why me, Timon?

TIMON That by killing of villains

Thou wast born to conquer my country.

Put up thy gold.

He gives Alcibiades gold





Go on; here’s gold; go on.

Be as a planetary plague when Jove

Will o’er some high-viced city hang his poison

In the sick air. Let not thy sword skip one.

Pity not honoured age for his white beard;

He is an usurer. Strike me the counterfeit matron;

It is her habit only that is honest,

Herself’s a bawd. Let not the virgin’s cheek

Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk paps

That through the window-bars bore at men’s eyes

Are not within the leaf of pity writ;

But set them down horrible traitors. Spare not the

babe

Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy.

Think it a bastard whom the oracle

Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,

And mince it sans remorse. Swear against objects.

Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes

Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,

Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,

Shall pierce a jot. There’s gold to pay thy soldiers.

Make large confusion, and, thy fury spent,

Confounded be thyself. Speak not. Be gone.

ALCIBIADES

Hast thou gold yet? I’ll take the gold thou giv’st me,

Not all thy counsel.

TIMON

Dost thou or dost thou not, heaven’s curse upon thee!

PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA

Give us some gold, good Timon. Hast thou more?

TIMON

Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,

And to make wholesomeness a bawd. Hold up, you

sluts,





Your aprons mountant.

⌈He throws gold into their aprons⌉





You are not oathable,

Although I know you’ll swear, terribly swear,

Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues

Th’immortal gods that hear you. Spare your oaths;

I’ll trust to your conditions. Be whores still,

And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,

Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up.

Let your close fire predominate his smoke;

And be no turncoats. Yet may your pain-sick months

Be quite contrary, and thatch your poor thin roofs

With burdens of the dead—some that were hanged,

No matter. Wear them, betray with them; whore still;

Paint till a horse may mire upon your face.

A pox of wrinkles!

PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA Well, more gold; what then?

Believe’t that we’ll do anything for gold.

TIMON Consumptions sow

In hollow bones of man, strike their sharp shins,

And mar men’s spurring. Crack the lawyer’s voice,

That he may never more false title plead

Nor sound his quillets shrilly. Hoar the flamen

That scolds against the quality of flesh

And not believes himself. Down with the nose,

Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away

Of him that his particular to foresee

Smells from the general weal. Make curled-pate

ruffians bald,

And let the unscarred braggarts of the war

Derive some pain from you. Plague all,

That your activity may defeat and quell

The source of all erection. There’s more gold.

Do you damn others, and let this damn you;

And ditches grave you all!

PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA

More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.

TIMON

More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.

ALCIBIADES

Strike up the drum towards Athens. Farewell, Timon.

If I thrive well, I’ll visit thee again.

TIMON

If I hope well, I’ll never see thee more.

ALCIBIADES I never did thee harm.

TIMON Yes, thou spok’st well of me.

ALCIBIADES Call’st thou that harm?

TIMON

Men daily find it. Get thee away,

And take thy beagles with thee.

ALCIBIADES We but offend him. Strike!

Exeunt ⌈to drum and fife⌉ all but Timon

TIMON

That nature, being sick of man’s unkindness,

Should yet be hungry!

He digs the earth





Common mother—thou

Whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast

Teems and feeds all, whose selfsame mettle

Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puffed

Engenders the black toad and adder blue,

The gilded newt and eyeless venomed worm,

With all th‘abhorrèd births below crisp heaven

Whereon Hyperion’s quick’ning fire doth shine—

Yield him who all thy human sons do hate

From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root.

Ensear thy fertile and conceptions womb;

Let it no more bring out ingrateful man.

Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;

Teem with new monsters whom thy upward face

Hath to the marbled mansion all above

Never presented.

He finds a root





O, a root! Dear thanks.

Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas,

Whereof ingrateful man with liquorish draughts

And morsels unctuous greases his pure mind,

That from it all consideration slips!—

Enter Apemantus





More man? Plague, plague!

APEMANTUS

I was directed hither. Men report

Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.

TIMON

’Tis then because thou dost not keep a dog

Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee!

APEMANTUS

This is in thee a nature but infected,

A poor unmanly melancholy, sprung

From change of fortune. Why this spade, this place,

This slave-like habit, and these looks of care?

Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,

Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot

That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods

By putting on the cunning of a carper.

Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive

By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee,

And let his very breath whom thou‘lt observe

Blow off thy cap. Praise his most vicious strain,

And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus.

Thou gav’st thine ears like tapsters that bade welcome

To knaves and all approachers. ’Tis most just

That thou turn rascal. Hadst thou wealth again,

Rascals should have’t. Do not assume my likeness.

TIMON

Were I like thee, I’d throw away myself.

APEMANTUS

Thou hast cast away thyself being like thyself—

A madman so long, now a fool. What, think‘st

That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,

Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these mossed trees

That have outlived the eagle page thy heels

And skip when thou point’st out? Will the cold brook,

Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste

To cure thy o’ernight’s surfeit? Call the creatures

Whose naked natures live in all the spite

Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhousèd trunks

To the conflicting elements exposed

Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee.

O, thou shalt find—

TIMON A fool of thee! Depart.

APEMANTUS

I love thee better now than e’er I did.

TIMON

I hate thee worse.

APEMANTUS Why?

TIMON Thou flatter’st misery.

APEMANTUS

I flatter not, but say thou art a caitiff.

TIMON

Why dost thou seek me out?

APEMANTUS To vex thee.

TIMON

Always a villain’s office, or a fool’s.

Dost please thyself in’t?

APEMANTUS Ay.

TIMON What, a knave too?

APEMANTUS

If thou didst put this sour cold habit on

To castigate thy pride, ‘twere well; but thou

Dost it enforcèdly. Thou’dst courtier be again

Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery

Outlives incertain pomp, is crowned before.

The one is filling still, never complete;

The other at high wish. Best state, contentless,

Hath a distracted and most wretched being,

Worse than the worst, content.

Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.

TIMON

Not by his breath that is more miserable.

Thou art a slave whom fortune’s tender arm

With favour never clasped, but bred a dog.

Hadst thou like us from our first swathe proceeded

The sweet degrees that this brief world affords

To such as may the passive drudges of it

Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself

In general riot, melted down thy youth

In different beds of lust, and never learned

The icy precepts of respect, but followed

The sugared game before thee. But myself,

Who had the world as my confectionary,

The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men

At duty, more than I could frame employment,

That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves

Do on the oak, have with one winter’s brush

Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare

For every storm that blows—I to bear this,

That never knew but better, is some burden.

Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time

Hath made thee hard in’t. Why shouldst thou hate men?

They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?

If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,

Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff

To some she-beggar and compounded thee

Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone.

If thou hadst not been born the worst of men

Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.

APEMANTUS Art thou proud yet?

TIMON Ay, that I am not thee.

APEMANTUS I that I was

No prodigal.

TIMON I that I am one now.

Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee

I’d give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.

That the whole life of Athens were in this!

Thus would I eat it.

He bites the root





APEMANTUS ⌈offering food⌉ Here, I will mend thy feast.

TIMON

First mend my company: take away thyself.

APEMANTUS

So I shall mend mine own by th’ lack of thine.

TIMON

’Tis not well mended so, it is but botched;

If not, I would it were.

APEMANTUS What wouldst thou have to Athens?

TIMON

Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,

Tell them there I have gold. Look, so I have.

APEMANTUS

Here is no use for gold.

TIMON The best and truest,

For here it sleeps and does no hired harm.

APEMANTUS Where liest a-nights, Timon?

TIMON Under that’s above me. Where feed’st thou a-days, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS Where my stomach finds meat; or rather, where I eat it.

TIMON Would poison were obedient, and knew my mind!

APEMANTUS Where wouldst thou send it?

TIMON To sauce thy dishes.

APEMANTUS The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the extremity of both ends. When thou wast in thy gilt and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much curiosity; in thy rags thou know’st none, but art despised for the contrary. There’s a medlar for thee; eat it.

TIMON On what I hate I feed not.

APEMANTUS Dost hate a medlar?

TIMON Ay, though it look like thee.

APEMANTUS An thou’dst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldst have loved thyself better now. What man didst thou ever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?

TIMON Who, without those means thou talk’st of, didst thou ever know beloved?

APEMANTUS Myself.

TIMON I understand thee: thou hadst some means to keep a dog.

APEMANTUS What things in the world canst thou nearest compare to thy flatterers?

TIMON Women nearest; but men, men are the things themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?

APEMANTUS Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

TIMON Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men, and remain a beast with the beasts?

APEMANTUS Ay, Timon.

TIMON A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t‘attain to. If thou wert the lion, the fox would beguile thee. If thou wert the lamb, the fox would eat thee. If thou wert the fox, the lion would suspect thee when peradventure thou wert accused by the ass. If thou wert the ass, thy dullness would torment thee, and still thou lived’st but as a breakfast to the wolf. If thou wert the wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner. Wert thou the unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee, and make thine own self the conquest of thy fury. Wert thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse. Wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the leopard. Wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the lion, and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life; all thy safety were remotion, and thy defence absence. What beast couldst thou be that were not subject to a beast? And what a beast art thou already, that seest not thy loss in transformation!

APEMANTUS If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou mightst have hit upon it here. The commonwealth of Athens is become a forest of beasts.

TIMON How, has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?

APEMANTUS Yonder comes a poet and a painter. The plague of company light upon thee! I will fear to catch it, and give way. When I know not what else to do, I’ll see thee again. 356

TIMON When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be welcome. I had rather be a beggar’s dog than Apemantus.

APEMANTUS

Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.

TIMON

Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon.

APEMANTUS

A plague on thee! Thou art too bad to curse.

TIMON

All villains that do stand by thee are pure.

APEMANTUS

There is no leprosy but what thou speak’st.

TIMON If I name thee.

I’d beat thee, but I should infect my hands.

APEMANTUS

I would my tongue could rot them off.

TIMON

Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!

Choler does kill me that thou art alive.

I swoon to see thee.

APEMANTUS Would thou wouldst burst!

TIMON Away, thou tedious rogue!

⌈He throws a stone at Apemantus⌉





I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.

APEMANTUS Beast!

TIMON Slave!

APEMANTUS Toad!

TIMON Rogue, rogue, rogue!

I am sick of this false world, and will love naught

But even the mere necessities upon’t.

Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave.

Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat

Thy gravestone daily. Make thine epitaph,

That death in me at others’ lives may laugh.

He looks on the gold





O, thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce

‘Twixt natural son and sire; thou bright defiler

Of Hymen’s purest bed; thou valiant Mars;

Thou ever young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,

Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow

That lies on Dian’s lap; thou visible god,

That sold’rest close impossibilities

And mak‘st them kiss, that speak’st with every tongue

To every purpose; O thou touch of hearts:

Think thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue

Set them into confounding odds, that beasts

May have the world in empire.

APEMANTUS Would ’twere so,

But not till I am dead. I’ll say thou’st gold.

Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.

TIMON Thronged to?

APEMANTUS Ay.

TIMON

Thy back, I prithee.

APEMANTUS Live, and love thy misery.

TIMON

Long live so, and so die. I am quit.

Enter the Banditti, thieves





APEMANTUS

More things like men. Eat, Timon, and abhor them.

Exit

FIRST THIEF Where should he have this gold? It is some poor fragment, some slender ort of his remainder. The mere want of gold and the falling-from of his friends drove him into this melancholy.

SECOND THIEF It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.

THIRD THIEF Let us make the assay upon him. If he care not for’t, he will supply us easily. If he covetously reserve it, how shall ’s get it?

SECOND THIEF True, for he bears it not about him; ’tis hid.

FIRST THIEF Is not this he?

OTHER THIEVES Where?

SECOND THIEF ’Tis his description.

THIRD THIEF He, I know him.

ALL THIEVES (coming forward) Save thee, Timon.

TIMON Now, thieves.

ALL THIEVES

Soldiers, not thieves.

TIMON Both, too, and women’s sons.

ALL THIEVES We are not thieves, but men that much do want.

TIMON

Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.

Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots.

Within this mile break forth a hundred springs.

The oaks bear mast, the briars scarlet hips.

The bounteous housewife nature on each bush

Lays her full mess before you. Want? Why want?

FIRST THIEF

We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,

As beasts and birds and fishes.

TIMON

Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds and fishes;

You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con

That you are thieves professed, that you work not

In holier shapes; for there is boundless theft

In limited professions. (Giving gold) Rascal thieves,

Here’s gold. Go suck the subtle blood o‘th’ grape

Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,

And so scape hanging. Trust not the physician:

His antidotes are poison, and he slays

More than you rob. Take wealth and lives together.

Do villainy; do, since you protest to do’t,

Like workmen. I’ll example you with thievery.

The sun’s a thief, and with his great attraction

Robs the vast sea. The moon’s an arrant thief,

And her pale fire she snatches from the sun.

The sea’s a thief, whose liquid surge resolves

The moon into salt tears. The earth’s a thief,

That feeds and breeds by a composture stol’n

From gen‘ral excrement. Each thing’s a thief.

The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power

Has unchecked theft. Love not yourselves. Away,

Rob one another. There’s more gold. Cut throats;

All that you meet are thieves. To Athens go,

Break open shops; nothing can you steal

But thieves do lose it. Steal no less for this I give you,

And gold confound you howsoe’er. Amen.

THIRD THIEF He’s almost charmed me from my profession by persuading me to it.

FIRST THIEF ’Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises us, not to have us thrive in our mystery.

SECOND THIEF I’ll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.

FIRST THIEF Let us first see peace in Athens. There is no time so miserable but a man may be true.

Exeunt Thieves

Enter Flavius to Timon





FLAVIUS O you gods!

Is yon despised and ruinous man my lord,

Full of decay and failing? O monument

And wonder of good deeds evilly bestowed!

What an alteration of honour has desp’rate want made!

What viler thing upon the earth than friends,

Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!

How rarely does it meet with this time’s guise,

When man was wished to love his enemies!

Grant I may ever love and rather woo

Those that would mischief me than those that do!

Timon sees him





He’s caught me in his eye. I will present

My honest grief unto him, and as my lord

Still serve him with my life.—My dearest master.

TIMON

Away! What art thou?

FLAVIUS Have you forgot me, sir?

TIMON

Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;

Then if thou grant‘st thou’rt man, I have forgot thee.

FLAVIUS An honest poor servant of yours.

TIMON

Then I know thee not. I never had

Honest man about me; ay, all I kept were knaves,

To serve in meat to villains.

FLAVIUS The gods are witness,

Ne’er did poor steward wear a truer grief

For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.

TIMON

What, dost thou weep? Come. nearer then; I love thee

Because thou art a woman, and disclaim’st

Flinty mankind whose eyes do never give

But thorough lust and laughter. Pity’s sleeping.

Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with

weeping!

FLAVIUS

I beg of you to know me, good my lord,

T’accept my grief,

⌈He offers his money⌉





and whilst this poor wealth lasts

To entertain me as your steward still.

TIMON Had I a steward

So true, so just, and now so comfortable?

It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.

Let me behold thy face. Surely this man

Was born of woman.

Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,

You perpetual sober gods! I do proclaim

One honest man—mistake me not, but one,

No more, I pray—and he’s a steward.

How fain would I have hated all mankind,

And thou redeem‘st thyself! But all save thee

I fell with curses.

Methinks thou art more honest now than wise,

For by oppressing and betraying me

Thou mightst have sooner got another service;

For many so arrive at second masters

Upon their first lord’s neck. But tell me true—

For I must ever doubt, though ne’er so sure—

Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,

A usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,

Expecting in return twenty for one?

FLAVIUS

No, my most worthy master, in whose breast

Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late.

You should have feared false times when you did feast.

Suspect still comes where an estate is least.

That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,

Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,

Care of your food and living; and, believe it,

My most honoured lord,

For any benefit that points to me,

Either in hope or present, I’d exchange

For this one wish: that you had power and wealth

To requite me by making rich yourself.

TIMON

Look thee, ’tis so. Thou singly honest man,

⌈He gives Flavius gold⌉





Here, take. The gods, out of my misery,

Has sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy,

But thus conditioned: thou shalt build from men,

Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,

But let the famished flesh slide from the bone

Ere thou relieve the beggar. Give to dogs

What thou deniest to men. Let prisons swallow ‘em,

Debts wither ’em to nothing; be men like blasted woods,

And may diseases lick up their false bloods.

And so farewell, and thrive.

FLAVIUS O, let me stay

And comfort you, my master.

TIMON If thou hat’st curses,

Stay not. Fly whilst thou art blest and free.

Ne’er see thou man, and let me ne’er see thee.

Exeunt ⌈Timon into his cave, Flavius another way⌉





5.1 Enter Poet and Painter



PAINTER As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he abides.

POET What’s to be thought of him? Does the rumour hold for true that he’s so full of gold?

PAINTER Certain. Alcibiades reports it. Phrynia and Timandra had gold of him. He likewise enriched poor straggling soldiers with great quantity. ’Tis said he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.

POET Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends?

PAINTER Nothing else. You shall see him a palm in Athens again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore ’tis not amiss we tender our loves to him in this supposed distress of his. It will show honestly in us, and is very likely to load our purposes with what they travail for, if it be a just and true report that goes of his having.

POET What have you now to present unto him?

PAINTER Nothing at this time, but my visitation; only I will promise him an excellent piece.

POET I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent that’s coming toward him.

PAINTER Good as the best.

⌈Enter Timon from his cave, unobserved⌉





Promising is the very air o’th’ time; it opens the eyes of expectation. Performance is ever the duller for his act, and but in the plainer and simpler kind of people the deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is most courtly and fashionable. Performance is a kind of will or testament which argues a great sickness in his judgement that makes it.

TIMON (aside) Excellent workman, thou canst not paint a man so bad as is thyself.

POET (to Painter) I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for him. It must be a personating of himself, a satire against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.

TIMON (aside) Must thou needs stand for a villain in thine own work? Wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men? Do so; I have gold for thee.

POET (to Painter) Nay, let’s seek him. Then do we sin against our own estate When we may profit meet and come too late.

PAINTER True.

When the day serves, before black-cornered night,

Find what thou want’st by free and offered fight.

Come.

TIMON (aside)

I’ll meet you at the turn. What a god’s gold,

That he is worshipped in a baser temple

Than where swine feed!

‘Tis thou that rigg’st the barque and plough’st the foam,

Settlest admired reverence in a slave.

To thee be worship, and thy saints for aye

Be crowned with plagues, that thee alone obey.

Fit I meet them.

He comes forward to them





POET

Hail, worthy Timon!

PAINTER Our late noble master!

TIMON

Have I once lived to see two honest men?

POET

Sir, having often of your open bounty tasted,

Hearing you were retired, your friends fall’n off,

Whose thankless natures, O abhorred spirits,

Not all the whips of heaven are large enough—

What, to you,

Whose star-like nobleness gave life and infiuence

To their whole being! I am rapt, and cannot cover

The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude

With any size of words.

TIMON

Let it go naked; men may see’t the better.

You that are honest, by being what you are

Make them best seen and known.

PAINTER He and myself

Have travelled in the great show’r of your gifts,

And sweetly felt it.

TIMON Ay, you are honest men.

PAINTER

We are hither come to offer you our service.

TIMON

Most honest men. Why, how shall I requite you?

Can you eat roots and drink cold water? No.

POET and PAINTER

What we can do we’ll do to do you service.

TIMON

You’re honest men. You’ve heard that I have gold,

I am sure you have. Speak truth; you’re honest men.

PAINTER

So it is said, my noble lord, but therefor

Came not my friend nor I.

TIMON

Good honest men. (To Painter) Thou draw‘st a

counterfeit

Best in all Athens; thou’rt indeed the best;

Thou counterfeit’st most lively.

PAINTER

So so, my lord.

TIMON

E‘en so, sir, as I say. (To Poet) And for thy fiction,

Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth

That thou art even natural in thine art.

But for all this, my honest-natured friends,

I must needs say you have a little fault.

Marry, ’tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I

You take much pains to mend.

POET and PAINTER

Beseech your honour

To make it known to us.

TIMON You’ll take it ill.

POET and PAINTER Most thankfully, my lord.

TIMON Will you indeed?

POET and PAINTER Doubt it not, worthy lord.

TIMON

There’s never a one of you but trusts a knave

That mightily deceives you.

POET and PAINTER Do we, my lord?

TIMON

Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,

Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,

Keep in your bosom; yet remain assured

That he’s a made-up villain.

PAINTER I know none such, my lord.

POET Nor I.

TIMON

Look you, I love you well. I’ll give you gold,

Rid me these villains from your companies.

Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,

Confound them by some course, and come to me,

I’ll give you gold enough.

POET and PAINTER

Name them, my lord, let’s know them.

TIMON

You that way and you this—but two in company-

Each man apart, all single and alone,

Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.

⌈To Painter⌉ If where thou art two villains shall not be,

Come not near him. ⌈To Poet⌉ If thou wouldst not

reside

But where one villain is, then him abandon.

Hence; pack! ⌈Striking him⌉ There’s gold. You came

for gold, ye slaves.

⌈Striking Painter⌉ You have work for me; there’s

payment. Hence!

⌈Striking Poet⌉ You are an alchemist; make gold of that.

Out, rascal dogs! Exeunt ⌈Poet and Painter one way,

Timon into his cave⌉





5.2 Enter Flavius and two Senators



FLAVIUS

It is in vain that you would speak with Timon,

For he is set so only to himself

That nothing but himself which looks like man

Is friendly with him.

FIRST SENATOR

Bring us to his cave.

It is our part and promise to th’ Athenians

To speak with Timon.

SECOND SENATOR

At all times alike

Men are not still the same. ’Twas time and griefs

That framed him thus. Time with his fairer hand

Offering the fortunes of his former days,

The former man may make him. Bring us to him,

And chance it as it may.

FLAVIUS

Here is his cave.

(Calling) Peace and content be here! Lord Timon,

Timon,

Look out and speak to friends. Th’Athenians

By two of their most reverend senate greet thee.

Speak to them, noble Timon.

Enter Timon out of his cave

TIMON

Thou sun that comforts, burn! Speak and be hanged.

For each true word a blister, and each false

Be as a cantherizing to the root o’th’ tongue,

Consuming it with speaking.

FIRST SENATOR

Worthy Timon—

TIMON

Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.

FIRST SENATOR

The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.

TIMON

I thank them, and would send them back the plague

Could I but catch it for them.

FIRST SENATOR

O, forget

What we are sorry for, ourselves in thee.

The senators with one consent of love

Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought

On special dignities which vacant lie

For thy best use and wearing.

SECOND SENATOR

They confess

Toward thee forgetfulness too general-gross,

Which now the public body, which doth seldom

Play the recanter, feeling in itself

A lack of Timon’s aid, hath sense withal

Of it own fail, restraining aid to Timon;

And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,

Together with a recompense more fruitful

Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;

Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth

As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs,

And write in thee the figures of their love,

Ever to read them thine.

TIMON

You witch me in it,

Surprise me to the very brink of tears.

Lend me a fool’s heart and a woman’s eyes,

And I’ll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

FIRST SENATOR

Therefore so please thee to return with us,

And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take

The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,

Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name

Live with authority. So soon we shall drive back

Of Alcibiades th’approaches wild,

Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up

His country’s peace.

SECOND SENATOR And shakes his threat’ning sword Against the walls of Athens.

FIRST SENATOR

Therefore, Timon—

TIMON

Well, sir, I will; therefore I will, sir, thus.

If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,

Let Alcibiades know this of Timon:

That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,

And take our goodly aged men by th’ beards,

Giving our holy virgins to the stain

Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,

Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it

In pity of our aged and our youth,

I cannot choose but tell him that I care not;

And-let him take’t at worst—for their knives care

not

While you have throats to answer. For myself,

There’s not a whittle in th’ unruly camp

But I do prize it at my love before

The reverend’st throat in Athens. So I leave you

To the protection of the prosperous gods,

As thieves to keepers.

FLAVIUS (to Senators) Stay not; all’s in vain.

TIMON

Why, I was writing of my epitaph.

It will be seen tomorrow. My long sickness

Of health and living now begins to mend,

And nothing brings me all things. Go; live still.

Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,

And last so long enough.

FIRST SENATOR

We speak in vain.

TIMON

But yet I love my country, and am not

One that rejoices in the common wrack

As common bruit doth put it.

FIRST SENATOR

That’s well spoke.

TIMON

Commend me to my loving countrymen—

FIRST SENATOR

These words become your lips as they pass through

them.

SECOND SENATOR

And enter in our ears like great triumphers

In their applauding gates.

TIMON

Commend me to them,

And tell them that to ease them of their griefs,

Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,

Their pangs of love, with other incident throes

That nature’s fragile vessel doth sustain

In life’s uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them.

I’ll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades’ wrath.

FIRST SENATOR (aside)

I like this well; he will return again.

TIMON

I have a tree which grows here in my close

That mine own use invites me to cut down,

And shortly must I fell it. Tell my friends,

Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree

From high to low throughout, that whoso please

To stop affliction, let him take his haste,

Come hither ere my tree hath felt the axe,

And hang himself. I pray you do my greeting.

FLAVIUS (to Senators)

Trouble him no further. Thus you still shall find him.

TIMON

Come not to me again, but say to Athens,

Timon hath made his everlasting mansion

Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,

Who once a day with his embossed froth

The turbulent surge shall cover. Thither come,

And let my gravestone be your oracle.

lips, let four words go by, and language end.

What is amiss, plague and infection mend.

Graves only be men’s works, and death their gain.

Sun, hide thy beams. Timon hath done his reign.

Exit ⌈into his cave⌉

FIRST SENATOR

His discontents are unremovably

Coupled to nature.

SECOND SENATOR

Our hope in him is dead. Let us return,

And strain what other means is left unto us

In our dear peril.

FIRST SENATOR

It requires swift foot.

Exeunt





5.3 Enter two other Senators, with a Messenger



⌈THIRD⌉ SENATOR

Thou hast painfully discovered. Are his files

As full as thy report?

MESSENGER

I have spoke the least.

Besides, his expedition promises

Present approach.

⌈FOURTH⌉ SENATOR

We stand much hazard if they bring not Timon.

MESSENGER

I met a courier, one mine ancient friend,

Whom, though in general part we were opposed,

Yet our old love made a particular force

And made us speak like friends. This man was riding

From Alcibiades to Timon’s cave

With letters of entreaty which imported

His fellowship i’th’ cause against your city,

In part for his sake moved.

Enter the other Senators

⌈THIRD⌉ SENATOR

Here come our brothers.

⌈FIRST⌉ SENATOR

No talk of Timon; nothing of him expect.

The enemy’s drum is heard, and fearful scouring

Doth choke the air with dust. In, and prepare.

Ours is the fall, I fear, our foe’s the snare. Exeunt





5.4 Enter a Soldier, in the woods, seeking Timon



SOLDIER

By all description, this should be the place.

Who’s here? Speak, ho! No answer?

⌈He discovers a gravestone⌉

What is this?

Dead, sure, and this his grave. What’s on this tomb

I cannot read. The character I’ll take with wax.

Our captain hath in every figure skill,

An aged interpreter, though young in days.

Before proud Athens he’s set down by this,

Whose fall the mark of his ambition is. Exit





5.5 Trumpets sound. Enter Alcibiades with his powers, before Athens



ALCIBIADES

Sound to this coward and lascivious town

Our terrible approach.

A parley sounds. The Senators appear upon the walls

Till now you have gone on and filled the time

With all licentious measure, making your wills

The scope of justice. Till now myself and such

As slept within the shadow of your power

Have wandered with our traversed arms, and breathed

Our sufferance vainly. Now the time is flush

When crouching marrow, in the bearer strong,

Cries of itself ‘No more’; now breathless wrong

Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,

And pursy insolence shall break his wind

With fear and horrid flight.

FIRST SENATOR

Noble and young,

When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,

Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,

We sent to thee to give thy rages balm,

To wipe out our ingratitude with loves

Above their quantity.

SECOND SENATOR

So did we woo

Transformed Timon to our city’s love

By humble message and by promised means.

We were not all unkind, nor all deserve

The common stroke of war.

FIRST SENATOR

These walls of ours

Were not erected by their hands from whom

You have received your grief; nor are they such

That these great tow’rs, trophies, and schools should fall

For private faults in them.

SECOND SENATOR

Nor are they living

Who were the motives that you first went out.

Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess,

Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,

Into our city with thy banners spread.

By decimation and a tithed death,

If thy revenges hunger for that food

Which nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth,

And by the hazard of the spotted die

Let die the spotted.

FIRST SENATOR

All have not offended.

For those that were, it is not square to take,

On those that are, revenges. Crimes like lands

Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,

Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage.

Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin

Which, in the bluster of thy wrath, must fall

With those that have offended. Like a shepherd

Approach the fold and cull th’infected forth,

But kill not all together.

SECOND SENATOR

What thou wilt,

Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile

Than hew to’t with thy sword.

FIRST SENATOR

Set but thy foot

Against our rampired gates and they shall ope,

So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before

To say thou’lt enter friendly.

SECOND SENATOR

Throw thy glove,

Or any token of thine honour else,

That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress,

And not as our confusion. All thy powers

Shall make their harbour in our town till we

Have sealed thy full desire.

ALCIBIADES ⌈throwing up a glove⌉

Then there’s my glove.

Descend, and open your uncharged ports.

Those enemies of Timon’s and mine own

Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof

Fall, and no more; and to atone your fears

With my more noble meaning, not a man

Shall pass his quarter or offend the stream

Of regular justice in your city’s bounds

But shall be remedied to your public laws

At heaviest answer.

BOTH SENATORS ’Tis most nobly spoken.

ALCIBIADES Descend, and keep your words.

⌈Trumpets sound. Exeunt Senators from the walls.⌉



Enter Soldier, with a tablet of wax





SOLDIER

My noble general, Timon is dead,

Entombed upon the very hem o’th’ sea;

And on his gravestone this insculpture, which

With wax I brought away, whose soft impression

Interprets for my poor ignorance.

Alcibiades reads the epitaph





ALCIBIADES

‘Here lies a wretched corpse,

Of wretched soul bereft.

Seek not my name. A plague consume

You wicked caitiffs left!

Here lie I, Timon, who alive

All living men did hate.

Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass

And stay not here thy gait.’

These well express in thee thy latter spirits.

Though thou abhorred‘st in us our human griefs,

Scorned’st our brains’ flow and those our droplets which

From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit

Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye

On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead

Is noble Timon, of whose memory

Hereafter more.

⌈Enter Senators through the gates⌉





Bring me into your city,

And I will use the olive with my sword,

Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each

Prescribe to other as each other’s leech.

Let our drums strike.

⌈Drums.⌉ Exeunt ⌈through the gates⌉





